The Application of Data Farming and Wargaming to Coalition Decision-Making
Dr. Gary Horne MCR Global Brussels, Belgium gary.horne@mcri.com
Dr. Wayne Stilwell Stilwell Technology and Robotics Manassas, Virginia
wa y n e @ m a c h i n e t e a m s . c o m
AB S TRACT
Data Farming is a methodology that combines simulation modeling, rapid scenario generation, high performance computing, experimental design, analysis and visualization, and collaborative processes. Data farming is a quantified approach that examines questions in large possibility spaces and evaluates whole landscapes of outcomes todrawinsightsfromoutcomedistributionsandoutliers.Wargamingisanactivitynot involving actualforces,but represents military operations in conflict situations of various types. Wargaming normally attempts to adjudicate sequentialplayerdecisionswithinarepresentationofsimultaneity.Eachplayer,whocanrepresentanation-state or otherpolitical-militaryentity,takesactionsinturnbasedonthecurrentsituationandwithinthelimits ofthegameas to their ability to react to the most recent moves made by players before them during a game turn.
In this paper we describe our work combining the power of data farming with wargaming in order to demonstrate thesynergiesbetweenthetwoincapturingthedynamicinteractionamongfriendly,adversary,andotherforces.We d i s c u s s o u r w o r k w i t h a H y b r i d W a r f a r e s c e n a r i o i n v o l v i n g c o a l i t i o n f o r c e s r e q u i r i n g e xt e n s i v e k n o w l e d g e o f t h e decision-makers and their long-term goals, their risk attitude, their rational and irrational constraints, diplomatic capabilities,andstrategicagility.Inparticular,weconsidertheelementsofconventionalforces andirregularforces; police forces and influence on urban/rural areas; force mix of political, military, industrial, and cyber warfare initiatives;nationalthreatinfluencefrombeyondborders,electioninterferenceandexternalpropagandaeffects;and impacts of cyber and national infrastructure interference.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Gary Horne is the Technical Director of M&S Solutions at MCR Global with a doctorate in Operations Research from The George Washington University. During his career in defense analysis, he has led data farming efforts examining questions in areas such as humanitarian assistance, convoy protection, and anti-terrorist response. He chaired the NATO Modeling and Simulation Task Group MSG-088, Data Farming Support to NATO, which completed documentation of the data farming process and won a NATO Scientific Achievement Award. His continuedworkwithNATOincludesserviceasco-chairofthetaskgroup Data Farming Servicesand in this task group he is focusing on cyber questions. He has led the Data Farming Community through the 32 International W o rks h ops t h at h a ve t a ken p la c e t o d a te a n d is p la n n ing t he 33rd W o rks h o p s c h e d u le d t o t a ke p la c e in Fin la n d in October 2018.
Wayne Stilwell is the CEO of Stilwell Technology and Robotics, LLC, with a doctorate in systems and information engineeringfromtheUniversityofVirginia. DuringhiscareerasaUSArmyofficerwithaspecialtyinsimulations operations,heheldseveralleadershippositionsinwargaminganddatafusion/systeminteroperability development and operations. He has led data farming workshop teams in Finland and the US. He holds a patent pending in robotic interfaces, which focuses on data exchange between cooperative robots. His company is actively engaged in developing drone-swarming techniques across land, sea and air operations. He currently teaches manufacturing technology,commercialdroneapplications,FAAunmannedsystems examination preparation,andcybertechnology at community colleges as well as online for high schools.
2018 Paper No. 57 Page 1 of 9
MODSIM World 2018

The Application of Data Farming and Wargaming to Coalition Decision-Making
Dr. Gary Horne MCR Global Brussels, Belgium gary.horne@mcri.com
INTRODUCTION
Dr. Wayne Stilwell Stilwell Technology and Robotics Manassas, Virginia
wa y n e @ m a c h i n e t e a m s . c o m
Data Farming is a quantified approach that examines questions in large possibility spaces using modeling and simulation. It evaluates whole landscapes of outcomes to draw insights from outcome distributions and outliers. This evaluationis made possible by “growing” massive amounts of data through the execution of many simulation runs. The name Data Farming was initially coined in 1997 (Horne 1997). Since that time the data farmingcommunityhasgrowntoincludepeoplefromoveradozennations. Datafarmingcontinuestoevolvefrom initial work in a United States Marine Corps effort called Project Albert (Hoffman and Horne 1998) to work including that done at data farming workshops which number 32 to date. The Scythe is the publication of the InternationalDataFarmingCommunitythatcontainsproceedingsoftheseworkshops (i.e.MeyerandHorne2014, etc.) and that can be found at www.datafarming.org.
Data farming normally uses s imulation in a collaborative and iterative team environment (Horne and Meyer 2004) that has been used primarily in defense applications (Horne and Meyer 2010). This process ideally has input and participation bysubjectmatterexperts,modelers,analysts,and decision-makers. Data farming is a process that has beendevelopedtosupportdecision-makersbyansweringquestionsthatarenotcurrentlyaddressed.Datafarminguses an inter-disciplinaryapproachthatincludesmodeling and simulation, high performance computing, and statistical analysis to examine questions of interest with large number of alternatives. Data farming allows for the examination of uncertaineventswithnumerouspossibleoutcomesandprovidesthecapabilityofexecutingenoughexperimentssothat both overall and unexpected results may be captured and examined for insights.
In2010, theNATOResearchandTechnologyOrganizationstarted the Modeling and Simulation TaskGroup Data FarminginSupportofNATOtoassessanddocumentthedatafarming methodologytobe used for decision support. This group was called MSG-088 and this paper includes a summary of the sixrealms of data farming as outlined during thecourseofMSG-088(Horneetal.2014). UponcompletionofMSG-088,afollow-ontaskgroupcalledDeveloping Actionable Data Farming Decision Support was initiated by NATO and was designated MSG-124. This task group has completedworkinselectedapplicationareasimportanttoNATOandwasfocused on iterative exploration of“what- if?”questionstorevealthelandscapeofpossibilitiesinherentinthescenariosandenablethestudyofany outliers that werediscovered.AnewNATOtaskgroup,designatedMSG-155hassincebeenformedandhasbeguntodevelop the topic of Data Farming Services.
In this paper we describe our work combining the power of data farming with wargaming in order to demonstrate thesynergiesbetweenthetwoincapturingthedynamicinteractionamongfriendly,adversary,andotherforces.We d i s c u s s o u r w o r k w i t h a H y b r i d W a r f a r e s c e n a r i o i n v o l v i n g c o a l i t i o n f o r c e s r e q u i r i n g e xt e n s i v e k n o w l e d g e o f t h e decision-makers and their long-term goals, their risk attitude, their rational and irrational constraints, diplomatic capabilities,andstrategicagility.Inparticular,weconsidertheelementsofconventionalforces andirregularforces; police forces and influence on urban/rural areas; force mix of political, military, industrial, and cyber warfare initiatives;nationalthreatinfluencefrombeyondborders,electioninterferenceandexternalpropagandaeffects;and impacts of cyber and national infrastructure interference.
DATA FARMING
Datafarmingusesaniterativeapproachthatis illustratedbytheloopofloopsinFigure1(www.datafarming.org). The firstrealm,rapidprototyping,workswiththesecondrealm,modeldevelopment,iterativelyin anexperimentdefinition
2018 Paper No. 57 Page 2 of 9
MODSIM World 2018

loop. A rapidly prototyped model provides a starting point in examining the initial questions and the model developmentregimensupportsthemodelimplementation,definingtheresolution,scope,and data requirements.The thirdrealm,designofexperiments,enablestheexecutionofabroadinputfactorspacewhilekeepingthecomputational requirements within feasible limits. High performance computing, realm four, allows for the execution of the many simulation runs that is both a necessity and a major advantage of data farming. The fifth realm, analysis and visualization,involvestechniquesandtools for examining the large output of data resulting fromthe data farming experiment.Thefinalrealm,collaborativeprocesses,underliestheentiredatafarmingprocessandtheseprocesses will bedescribedindetailinthissection. TheserealmsaredescribedindetailinHorneetal.2014,butwillbesummarized below.
Figure 1: Data Farming Loop of Loops
Rapid Scenario Prototyping
The model development and the rapid prototyping realms of data farming together make up the experiment definition loop in Figure 1. As such, they work hand-in-hand with each other and we could choose either realm to beginourdetaileddescriptionofdatafarming.Thustherapidscenarioprototypingprocess is a good place to start our discussion, although starting with the model development realm would also be appropriate.
As with the data farming process in general, the rapid scenario prototyping should always be within the context of the questions to be answered. These questions have to be prepared in such a way that simulation can help to find answersandtogetinsights.Themostimportant step here is to define measurements to be collected by means of simulationtogetherwithrequiredinputandoutputdataforthesimulation.Inmost cases this step already requires s ome rough ideas about the s cenario s ettings. Thus, this realm s imply repres ents the initial formation of the bas ics of a scenario to be simulated.
Model Development
A s s t ate d in t h e p re v io u s s u b s e c t io n , t h e mo d e l d e v e lo p me n t re a lm wo rks h a n d -in -h a n d wit h t h e ra p id s c e n a rio prototypingrealmintheexperimentdefinitionloopontheleftsideofFigure1.Thefundamentaloutputofthisloopis a scenarioinstantiatedinaworkingsimulationmodelthatcapturestheessenceofaquestionandthat can be sent to the mu lt i-ru n e xe c u t ion lo op o f t h e d a ta fa rmin g p ro c e s s . Of c o u rs e , mo re in s ig h t in t o t h e q u e s t io n , re fin e me n t o f t h e
MODSIM World 2018
 2018 Paper No. 57 Page 3 of 9

question, and/or deeper examination of the question may be enabled later through a return to the experiment definition loop later in the process.
Whendevelopingmodels,bothmodelingandsubjectmatterexpertsshouldbepresent.Rapid scenario prototyping provides model requirements for model development. For example, it is important to do one thing well, such as creating aggregated models that combine simple models instead of building single monolithic models, whenever possible. The more independent models are from each other, the better the potential results . Thus, one needs to encourage modularization and clear separation of different models, including develop ment practices for using models ofdifferent aggregationleveland scope. Other important characteristics of models as they are developed includereusability,interoperability,repeatability,andthoroughdocumentation. And,finally,openness should be encouraged, including the sharing of source code when possible given other constraints.
Design of Experiments
Design of experiments is one of the three realms of data farming in the multi-run execution loop. Along with the realms of high performance computing and analysis and visualization, the realm of design of experiments allow us to performmultiple runs to gain simulation results over a wide landscape of possibilities. Simulation models have many inputs or parameters (factors) that can be ch anged to explore alternatives. A designed experiment is a carefully chosensetofcombinationsoftheseinputs,calleddesignpoints,at which the simulation modelwillbe run. Design of experiments provides smarter ways of setting up the experiment that facilitate follow-on analysis and visualization of results in a reasonable amount of time.
Changing the factors in a brute force way, by looking at all possible combinations, is impractical or impossible, except for extremely simplistic simulations with only a handful of factors. Changing the factors all at once limits yourinsights.Itwill allowyoutoseewhetherornotthischangestheresponses,butyouwillnot be able to tellwhy the changes occur. For example, if mission effectiveness improves when you equip a squad with better sensors and better weapons, you will not know whether it is the weapon or the sensor that has the most impact. Changing the f a c t o r s o n e a t a t i me a l s o l i mi t s y o u r i n s i g h t s . I f t h e s q u a d g e t s a v e r y s ma l l i mp r o v e me n t f r o m a b e t t e r w e a p o n , a very small improvement froma better sensor, but a large improvement from both, you will not be able to identify this interaction(orsynergisticeffect)iftheexperimentaldesigndoesnotinvolvefactors forboththeweaponandthe sensor.
High Performance Computing (HPC)
HPCconsistsofbothhardwareandsoftwareresources.HPCsystems canbeconfigured as a single supercomputer with thousands of processors, as a network of clustered computers, or even as a single powerful desktop computer with multi-core processors. The hardware on these systems includes such things as processors, memory, networking hardware, and disk storage. HPC software includes, among other things: the operating system; underlying or supporting software which provide the environment to execute the model; and the data farming software, which enablesrunninginstancesofthemodelacrosstheHPCsystemcomputeunits.Bygeneratingand managing each of themodelruns overasetofdesignpointsorinputsets,thedatafarmingsoftwareprovidestheinfrastructure “glue” that “sticks together” the model, its set of inputs, the design, and the HPC resources.
The main purpose of HPC in the context of data farming is to provide the means to execute a data farming experiment. Other purposes of HPC are for us e in analysis and visualization of the output and for generating designs used in future data farming experiments. Given the large number of model runs made in a typical data farming experiment, HPC facilitates conducting the experiment in a timely manner as well as supporting the storage and analysis of huge volumes of output.
Analysis andVisualization
Analysisinthedatafarmingcontextistheprocessofexaminingdatathatisproducedbydatafarmingprocesses using statistical,summarizationandpresentationtechniquestohighlightusefulinformation,extractconclusions,andsupport decision-making. Visualisation is a collection of graphical and visual analysis techniques used to optimize and speed the process of exploring data, conveying understanding, and presenting in data farming processes. Much of the current
2018 Paper No. 57 Page 4 of 9
MODSIM World 2018

usageofanalysisandvisualizationinthedatafarmingprocesshasbeentheanalytic examination ofmultiple replicate and excursion model output.
In ordertoexploitthepotentiallyhugedataoutputfromthehighperformancecomputingexecutionofthedesign of experiments, highly effectiveanalysis techniques must be employed. Statistical analysis and visualisation can be used to discernwhetherdatamay have usefulmeaningful value and aid in the translation of data into information that is usefulin making progress in understanding possible answers to the questions at hand. The ability to use multiple techniques provides the ability to explore, investigate, and answer the questions posed. Every technique has strengths and limitations, therefore, especially for high-dimensional datasets, use of a family of techniques is preferabletouseofasingletechnique.Asstatedearlier,data farming gives us the ability to map the landscape of possibilities and in the process discover outliers. These outliers should always be considered and only be eliminated for appropriate reasons and can be investigated as a separate cohort of the data using various analysis and visualisation techniques.
Collaboration
Thespiritofcollaborationisthekeytenetofdatafarming.ItunderliestheloopofloopsinFigure1andholds within it muchofthepowerofdatafarming. Throughoutthedevelopmentofdatafarmingandtheformationofthedatafarming community,peoplehaveopenlysharedexperiencesandexpertise.One focus forcollaborative efforts has been and continuestobetheinternationalworkshops.The first internationalworkshop tookplace in 1999at the MauiHigh PerformanceComputingCenter.Thefirstfourworkshopsweremethodology driven,dealing with complexadaptive systems modelingand agentbasedrepresentation,with statisticalexperimentdesign and experiment evaluation. The subsequentworkshopswereandcontinuetobeapplicationdriven,andthecontributionstotheoveralladvancement of datafarmingtakesplaceinthedevelopmentofsimulationmodels,scenarioswithinthemodels,andcomputerclusters to run the models many times.
Therealworkisinmakingprogressonimportantquestionsandtherealsecretis thecombinationofmilitarysubject matterexpertsandhighlyknowledgeableandmulti-disciplinaryscientists.Thisspecialmixofpersonnelhas been the hallmarkof the international workshops and this mixhas promoted much networking opportunity. It has been a dynamic combination to have data farming work teams headed up by a person who really knows and cares about the question(e.g.amilitaryofficerwhoknowsthattheanswersmayhaveanimpactonbothmissionsuccessandlowering casualties) and supported by men and women with technical prowess who can leverage the tools available.
MSG-088 documented the following aspects of the collaborative processes in data farming: defining the characteristics and dimensions of collaboration in data farming, collaboration within and between the realms in data farming, collaboration of the people, collaboration of the data farming results, application of collaboration tools. This information can be foundin the fullreport as well as information on the current status of data farming in the attending nations and ideas about the future development of data farming (Horne et al. 2014).
Some Recent NATO Data Farming Work
In 2017, the Operation Planning Team and Cyber Team of MSG-124 completed work on applying data farming techniquestoexploresolutionstoimproveNATOcapability (HorneandSeichteretal.forthcoming).Inthecyber case, the scenarios considered spanned the threat spectrum, ranging from lone hackers to cyber espionage organizations.TheteamutilizedaNetLogomodeldevelopedbytheteamandtheanalysesfocusedonexploring the value of various network topologies and organizations, firewall policies and intrusion detection systems.
TheUS-ledcyberteamleveragedcurrentresearch,developedasuitablesimulation,andexploredpossiblescenarios throughdata farming that couldfacilitate the understanding of aspects of cyber defense important to NATO. The g r o u p d e f i n e d q u e s t i o n s w i t h i n t h e c y b e r d e f e n s e a r e a i n c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h c y b e r d e f e n s e e xp e r t s o f N A T O a n d t h e participating nations, provided modeling and simulation support for various cyber defense questions, and performed analysis and iterative exploration of what-if? questions to reveal the landscape of possibilities inherent in the s c e n a rio s a nd e n able t h e s tu dy o f a n y o ut lie rs t h a t a re d is c ove re d. Co mp le t e d oc ume n ta t io n o f b o t h t h e c y b e r t e a m work and the operation planning team work will be found in the forthcoming final report of MSG-124.
2018 Paper No. 57 Page 5 of 9
MODSIM World 2018

AnewNATOTaskGroup,MSG-155, beganinAugust2017withthegoalofextendingdatafarmingcapability and accessibilitythroughdevelopingDataFarmingServices(DFS).Thespecificobjectiveis to develop a road map for what needs to be done in order for NATO to provide DFS. This road map would show the way for developing a technicalconceptforDFSthroughan integratedtoolset.Additionally,theworkwould produce and refine technical prototypesusefulforimplementationoftheroadmap.DFSwouldsupporttheapplicationandexecutionofthe Data Farming process as codified in MSG-088 and as applied in MSG-124 in a productive and user-friendly way.
WARGAMING AND EXPLORATION OF QUESTIONS USING DATA FARMING
Wargaming is an activitynot involving actual forces, but represents military operations in conflict situations of various types. Wargaming normally attempts to adjudicate sequential player decisions within a representation of simultaneity. Each player, who can represent a nation-state or other political-military entity, takes actions in turn based onthe currentsituationandwithin the limits ofthe game as to theirability to react to the most recent moves made by players before themduring a game turn (US Army War College, 2017 and US Naval War College, 2008).
Wargaming is an extremely good candidate for data farming support due to the inherent ability to consider data within supporting simulations. Even without simulation support, wargaming preparations can anticipate decisions andpreparebranchesandsubsequentconsequences through more brute force methods ofdata farming.Having a readymadedataharvestalreadydevelopedinawargamesupportingsimulationproducestheopportunitytobroaden the impact of data farming on wargaming.
Theabilitytoexplorelargeproblemspaceswithmultipleparametercombinationsanddecisionbranchesinvitesdata farming’s exhaustivesearchstrengths tooffer insights and better inform decision-making. Simulation support to wargamingbecomesfarmorepowerfulwhendatafarmingisappliedandcanproducebetter-considered decisions. Wargaming, as developed in the US military over the years, has become a detailed development process that normally plays in consecutive turns. Simulation allows for greater simultaneous decisions by adversarial sides or a complexgroupingofopposingallieswithneutralsplayingaswell. Simulationshavebecomemuchmorecapableof assigning rewards, punishments, and consequences for game decisions made by a strategic, operational or a tactical player. Typicalwargamesconsiderdecisionsthatprogressindiscreteturns. Inatwo-sidedwargame,side1selects from a menu of decisions, and side 2 then selects from a menu of decisions given the actions of side 1. Consequencesofdecisionsarecalculated,andthegameeitherterminatesoradvancestothenextroundofturns.All competitive interactions can be modeled as a wargame.
Grand Bazaar Example
Take,forexample, asaleattheGrandBazaarin Istanbulinthe1700s. A Venetiantraderseessomegoldchainsthat hefancies,andheshowshisinterestbylookingatthegoodsinawaythatsignalsheisaprospectivebuyer. The salesman,anoldhandatthegameofhaggling,greetshimandgiveshimaveryhighpriceasanopeningmove. The traveler, wise also in the game, knows the price is too high and shows disinterest, and even looks down t oward anothergoldsalesareanearbytothreatenamovetothecompetition. Oneofthepartiesmustnowinitiateasecond round of bargaining, or the game ends with no transaction. That series of events, in wargaming and though quite simpleinconcept,introducesahostofpossibilitiesandbranches. Thepricethesalesmanoffersoriginallycanbe thoughtofas adecisionbasedonalargepossibilityspace.Hemighthaveageneralpricethatis always the opening price,andisdesignedtogreatlyoverchargethepoorlyinformedbuyer. Theprofitpotentialofevenafewsales may be worth the likely balking of some buyers who, based on the very high price, move on to another salesman immediately. Theopeningpricemightalsobebasedonacombinationofinputparameterssuchastimeofday,the dres s of the customer, the apparent s trength of interest by the customer, the volume of s ales over the past few hours , andthegeneralmoodofthesalesman. Amulti-variatespaceofexplorationisquicklycreated. Fromthesalesman’s perspective,datafarmingcouldbeusedtolookforlucrativecombinationsofparametersthat increase profit. After simulating many runs of different customer types, their patience and haggling skills, their balking likelihood, correlations of dress and interest to final price agreement, the salesman can much more successfully engage customers in the haggling game’s opening round.
Datafarmingcouldsetthetableforthesecondroundbyprovidinglikely price openings fromthe customer,orthe likelihoodsofacustomerpausethatisinvitingasecond,lowerpricefromthesalesman. Withmanybranchesof
2018 Paper No. 57 Page 6 of 9
MODSIM World 2018

possibilitiesalreadydevelopedinsimulationviadatafarming,thesecondround canopenwithafinalnofromthe customer,anagreementonprice,oracounter-offerthatwillmark thebeginningofthe next round ofnegotiations.
Natural Disaster Example
Adeeperexampleofmultiplesideddatafarmingcanbeillustratedthroughthedesireofnationalintra-governmental agencies to better develop response policies. The wargame, in this case, focuses on a developing country that has hadamajornaturaldisasterandisinamoreremotecontinentallocation. Multipleagencyheadscancongregateto react to initial news of the disaster, while executive leadership decides how much aid and support a nation will contribute to the effort. The efforts quickly begin to consider many factors of importance to the operation: How time sensitive is aid by what type, what other countries and agencies will vie for port, airhead, or rail delivery facilities, how long will it take to develop and deliver a logistics supply line, what security risks are involved, and how many ships, planes, soldiers, aid workers, supplies, and other assets should be committed.
Decisionsofthewargameparticipantsbegintotakeshapeas questionssuchas:shouldtheyparticipate?,howmuch shouldtheyparticipate?,howlong should they planon supporting such an operation?,and whatordershould aid and infrastructure be engaged?
Outcomes aredevelopedastheamountofreliefsuccessfullydelivered,lives saved,costssustained,assetsobligated, redundancy between countries and agencies, and others as applicable. Third order and long term effects of how aid and security operations affect power in the affected region, long-term stabilization, and governmental changes because of intervention can be studied as well.
Data farming in such a wargaming exercise would grow data in each round of decisions and their effects on subsequent rounds. Data can be regrown based on decision points through the rounds and take on a Bayesian paradigm in that once a set of decisions are made in a given round, the question then becomes, what happens afterwards? Decisionsmadebyasingleplayeraffectfuturedecisions,buttheyalsoservetooftenmagnifyor diminishthebenefitsordamagedonebyotherplayerssimultaneouslyinaround. Ifallplayersinthedisasterrelief scenario decide toengage whatare typically limited port facilities simultaneously, then many ships sit in a harbor waitingtobeunloaded. Starvationcouldbeexacerbatedandtragicconsideringfoodissittingonshipsanddelivery isdelayedduetocompetitionforhandlingequipment. Thischainofeventscouldalterthenextroundofdecisions byaplayertodosomethingaboutthecurrent situation by engaging more aircraft than initially committed and/or reshufflingitsorderofdeliveriesinhopeofamelioratingabottlenecksituation. Itcouldbethattheairheadbecomes clogged,andotherportswithoverlandtransportationlinks could be considered. That could require more ground transportation assets, road repair and upgrade, and additional parameter inclusions in the data farming model.
As more branches are identified or developed, a simulation that can incorporate data farming becomes a po werful toolforbetterdecision-making. Theconsequencesandrisksofdecisionsarebetterillustrated. Actualdecisions at the nationallevel should be extremely well explored, well understood events and based on the best information available given time and expense of collection. Data farming can drastically reduce the time and expense of decision support information while greatly expanding the breadth of consideration.
Cuban Missile Crisis Example
A n e xa mp le o f a g o v e rnme nt t akin g u nkn own ris ks wa s d is c o v e re d d u rin g t h e p o s t -mo rt e m o f t h e Cu b a n M is s ile Crisis. Duringdiscussionsofthefatefuleventsof1962yearslater,diplomatsoftheSovietUnionrevealedthatnuclear attack authority had been released to the field commander (Sechser and Fuhrmann, 2017), meaning that a general and not thehead ofstatecouldnowuse nuclear weapons as he saw fit for operational and tactical advantage without oversightandconstraintbythestrategicimplicationsofhisactions. ThechanceofanuclearattackbytheSovietUnion ontheforcesoftheUnitedStateswasfarmore likely than American diplomats and military planners realized. The Americans were actually firing depth charges on a Soviet nuclear submarine and the possibilities for nuclear strike were much greater than realized. Only the restrained thinking of a local Soviet military leader kept the confrontation frombeingnuclear. AstheAmericansfullyconsideredamphibiousinvasion,theSovietresponsewasalreadysealedas a nuclear counter-strike, unbeknownst to the American leaders.
2018 Paper No. 57 Page 7 of 9
MODSIM World 2018

FUTURE WORK
Data farming does not necessarily help leaders make the exactly correct choice in a wargame or allow for the considerationofallparametersthatshouldbeexaminedinanimportantdecision. Itcan,however,greatlyincrease theclarityofdecisionsbasedonacomplexsetofknownparametersandalargerdecisioninteractionspacethan the human mind can well consider. The sheer volume of possibilities to consider becomes enormous to the point of requiringhighspeedcomputing. Theabilitytothinkthroughapreviousactualeventisobviouslyeasiertodraw conclusionsfromgiventhatlikelyoutcomesofdecisionscanbeverified. Thewargamingoffutureeventsrequiresa much more detailed and exhaustive ability to scour the depths of decision ramifications and the branches of co - adaptive environment decisions that result.
Integrating Data Farming and Wargaming
Simulation tools, as they exist, can be adapted to include data farming in support of wargaming. JTLS, JCATS, JDLM,VBS3, andothertacticalandstrategicsimulationscanprovidedataintoadatafarmingsoftwareapplication that sets the original table for the wargaming of a strategic or tactical option within a greater scenario. JTLS providesoutstandingsupportoftheaterlevellogisticsandcanprovidecommandandcontrolsysteminput data. A data farming applicationcan be developedin support ofsuchsimulationtools thatcan return multiple scenario input datatosetthetableformultiplepossiblescenarios. Asimulationcanthendevelopmultipleinstantiationsofstart points for wargaming turns that can be auto run for analytical purposes, or that can be available as branches of wargamedecisionsthroughsimulationsupport. Interoperablesimulationfederationswithdataexchangingbetween many simulations and commandandcontrol systems can also be greatly assisted through strap-on data farming module support.
AI can also be harnessed to develop likely parameter growth in decision branches and automatically grow data. Experimental design within hardened parameters can be auto-generated and rapidly, through high performance computing,continuouslydevelopwargamedecisionbranchesandtheirsubsequent likely consequences and third ordereffects. Theauto-generationofadatafarmingcyclecouldbringamuchmorepowerfuland responsive edge to complexenvironments and systems decisions.
Hybrid Warfare
On e s p e c ific t o p ic a re a o f p o t ent ia l fu t u re wo rk is Hy b rid W a rfa re . Hy b rid W a rfa re is a n e xt re me ly c o mp le x g a me ofcatandmousethatusesalloftheinfluence,force,threat,powerandnuancethatanation-statecanmuster. Asthe technologicalmarch oftime has progressed,nation-states wield far more communicative power over lethal forces andcanretractmajorforcesfromengagementsshortlybeforetheyoccur. Theadditionofcyberattackcapabilities to undermine or embarrass a government adds another significant variable to an environment that also includes diplomacy,alliances,peacemaking,economicinfluences,andanyformofuseofpowerthatadvancesanation-state towardsaparticulargoal. Datafarmingquicklybecomesastronglydesiredcapabilitywhenthecombinationsofuse of force and other types of national power are so nuanced and rapidly interchangeable.
Theabilitytodescribemanysides,alliances,usesofforceandtheirrelativeeffectivenesstootherplayers,costsand consequences of actions or inaction, and the second and third order effects create branches of possibility that are enormousinscope. ExaminingHybridWarfarescenariosinvolvingcoalitionforcesrequires extensiveknowledge of the decision-makers and their long-term goals, risk attitude, rational and irrational constraints, diplomatic capabilities,andstrategicagility.Highperformancecomputingand the experimentation strengths ofdata farming becomenotonlydesiredbutalsonecessaryundertheseconditions.Infutureworkwemustconsidersuchfactors as theelements ofconventionalforcesandirregularforces;policeforces andinfluenceonurban/ruralareas; force mix ofpolitical,military, industrial,andcyberwarfareinitiatives;nationalthreatinfluencefrombeyondborders,election interference and external propaganda effects; and impacts of cyber and national infrastructure interference.
AsafurtherexampleofpossiblefutureworkintheareaofHybridWarfare,supposeanaggressornationhas agoal ofpacifyingasmallneighbor’sgovernmentalwilltothepointofbecominga satellite.Theaggressorgivescontinual threatstoscareitspeopleintosubmission,issuespassportstothesmallcountry’scitizens,conductscyberattacks to weakenpublictrustinbanks,transportation,emergencyservices,andpublicgovernance,andmasses troops on the smallborderregularlyasintimidation.Theresponsesofthesmallercountryhavemanypossibilities,butusually fall
2018 Paper No. 57 Page 8 of 9
MODSIM World 2018

in therangeofpublicdefianceandallyseekingwhiledoingallit cantodissuade the largercountry fromattacking throughdiplomacy. Theintegrationofdatafarmingintoawargamingprocesstohelpthesmallercountry’sdecision making would require reliable data from military, economic, public infrastructure, and industrial sources. There wouldnecessarilybearedforceplayerwhowaseitherateamofexperts onthelikelybehaviorsandreactionsofthe larger country, or an artificially intelligent agent that would make decisions according to a validated model. Once reliable data is introduced intosucha wargame by a usefulsimulation capability,then data farming can be harnessed toexaminetherangeofpossibilitiesandlikelihoodsinsupportofdecisions. Thediscoverypowerofdatafarming canpossiblyfindnewperspectives,newconcerns,andpossiblestrategiesthatmaynotbeevidentto the naked eye. Basedontheriskofmiscalculationmultipliedbytheseverityofnuclearwarfare,advancingdatafarmingsupport of wargaming would be well worth the effort required.
REFERENCES
[1] Horne,G.1997. DataFarming:AMeta-TechniqueforResearchinthe21stCentury,briefingpresentedatthe Naval W ar College. Newport, RI.
[2] HoffmanF.G., andHorne,G.E., Eds.1998. ManeuverWarfareScience1998.Quantico,Virginia:Marine Corps Combat Development Command.
[3] Data Farming, http://www.datafarming.org accessed in February 2018.
[4] Meyer,T.andHorne,G.,Eds.Scythe,theProceedingsandBulletinoftheInternationalDataFarming
Community.Issue16–Workshop28,Jefferson,Maryland,USA,October2014.
[5] Meyer,T.andHorne,G.,Eds.Scythe,theProceedingsandBulletinoftheInternationalDataFarming
Community.Issue17–Workshop29,Riihimaki, Finland,March2015.
[6] Meyer,T.andHorne,G.,Eds.Scythe,theProceedingsandBulletinoftheInternationalDataFarming
Community.Issue18–Workshop30,Catania,Italy,February2016.
[7] Meyer,T.andHorne,G.,Eds.Scythe,theProceedingsandBulletinoftheInternationalDataFarming
Community.Issue19–Workshop31,Valkeakoski,Finland,October2016.
[8] Meyer,T.andHorne,G.,Eds.Scythe,theProceedingsandBulletinoftheInternationalDataFarming
Community.Issue20–Workshop32,Reston,USA,April2017.
[9] Horne,G.andMeyer,T.2004. DataFarming:DiscoveringSurprise.Proceedingsofthe2004WinterSimulation
Conference,Eds.R.Ingalls,M.D.Rossetti,J.S. Smith, and B. A.Peters,171-180. Washington,DC.
[10] Horne, G. and Meyer, T. 2010. Data Farming and Defense Applications, MODSIM W orld Conference and Expo, HamptonRoadsConventionCenter,Hampton,VA,USA13-15 October2010.
[11] Horne, G. et al. (2014). MSG-088 Data Farming in Support of NATO, Final Report, NA TO Science and Technology Office (STO).
[12] Horne, G. and Seichter, S. et al. (forthcoming). MSG-124 Developing Actionable Data Farming Decision Support for NATO, Final Report, NA TO Science and Technology Office (STO).
[13] USArmyWarCollege,StrategicWargamingSeriesHandbook,1July2015, 1st Ed,Carlisle,PA.
[14] US Naval W ar College, Wargamer’s Handbook, A Guide for Professional Wargamers, Newport, RI, 2008.
[15] Sechser,ThomasandMatthewFuhrmann,NuclearWeaponsandCoerciveDiplomacy,NewYork,NY, Cambridge University Press, 2017, p. 208.
2018 Paper No. 57 Page 9 of 9
MODSIM World 2018
