     A VMASC research team and numerous active duty clinicians collaborated to devise an instructional assist program and methodology designed as a serious computer based game and training platform for military health care professionals. The learner is guided by an avatar-preceptor through course content and multi-media enrichment  resources. She/he can present content through course completion using deliberative practice that progresses the learner to content mastery. In this case, the content is based on Team Strategies and Tools to Enhance Performance and Patient Safety (TeamSTEPPS), a patient safety and communications program in response to the DOD and national imperative to reduce preventable patient harm due to errors in care. Currently, this content is taught using a didactic approach, necessitating students and instructors leaving their workspace. Few measures of student program success exist due to administrative workload. We automated capture of content learning measures using validated instruments. We call this program the Course for Operationally Relevant Patient Safety or CORPS. The main research objective was to determine the efficacy of CORPS in teaching concepts of teamwork and communications in comparison to a control group that also uses TeamSTEPPS v. 2 content but instructs using a traditional didactic presentation. This study supports military medical deployment team needs and was conducted at a large military healthcare facility. Participating in the study were 320 learners. Results indicate the experimental group performance was as good as the control. There was a slight trending toward superior performance, but the process generated significant administrative time and cost savings. In three months, the course director reported actual time-savings of over 320 man hours that could be used for team simulation practice. At present, the Department of Patient Safety at the test site continues to use the CORPS prototype because of its effectiveness and demonstrated savings of time and cost. 