Military Operations Other Than War, from humanitarian assistance to counterinsurgency support, require actionable cultural intelligence  information that provides understanding of the behavior of a general population and its friendly, neutral, and hostile sub-groups, plus ways to recognize and predict changes in that behavior over time. Cultural intelligence is made actionable through integration with tactical data via the Intelligence Preparation of the Battlespace (IPB) process. Cultural intelligence development and application are poorly supported by existing intelligence systems. This paper explains how a cognitive engineering methodology was used to understand this problem from the analysts perspective and to develop human-centered technology solutions. Domain and semantic analyses were used to identify the concepts and relationships central to creating and applying cultural intelligence. Cognitive work analysis was then applied to the processes and workflows used in cultural intelligence and its integration into IPB at the infantry battalion (and below), where the problem is most acute. User-centered design methods were employed to create and refine user interface, automation, and novel workflow solutions. The paper also describes how the analysis demonstrated requirements for: flexible tools and interfaces allowing ad hoc creation and communication of intermediate products for rapid, collaborative evolution multiple combinable visualizations that support temporal, geo-spatial, and social network-based analysis Lastly, the paper delineates how the requirements translated into the goal of creating shareable, user-constructed products termed "mashups," which enable users to tailor and annotate visualizations for customized, mission- oriented intelligence products. Request for Information (RFI) workflows allow saved mashups and underlying data sets to be restored for live processing, ongoing analyses, and exploration of multiple hypotheses. Automated analyses of data-intensive social media sources were created to meet needs for instantaneous assessment of area atmospherics. These features are integrated into the CultureMap system, which was built upon CHI Systems 4D- Viz framework for creating Command and Control (C2) applications, and has proceeded through establishment of face and construct validity with domain experts. 