Various United States Air Force (USAF) service lines and program offices, from Air C2, Space C2 and Theater/Ballistic Missile Defense C2 offices, exist to provide end-to-end lifecycle services and capabilities. The involved training solutions are inherently stovepipe in nature as they are developed from domain specific requirements and focus on qualification training. Thus, training gaps exist to rehearse warfighting activities that integrate Air C2, Space C2 and Theater/Ballistic Missile Defense C2 Services, especially across small team core mission areas for warfighter proficiency. The Air Missile Space Training Environment (AMSTE) addresses these training gaps by integrating these service line training capabilities into a central enterprise training service line. The AMSTE initiative has four precepts: simplify Air, Missile, & Space (AMS) training, promote on-demand training, provide Training as a Service, and improve small team training. This paper addresses the current progress of AMSTE to accomplish these goals. AMSTE uses a collection of Government Off The Shelf (GOTS), Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS) and open source technologies to merge disparate legacy training solutions into a flexible, modular and scalable framework to facilitate cross-domain, on-demand training. The AMSTE is executed in a localized cloud architecture utilizing virtualization infrastructure running containerized training components. The orchestration of components is managed by the AMSTE framework abstraction layer. This unburdens the user from the complexities of the underlying legacy systems, while also providing an open framework for incorporating a variety of diverse legacy training systems. Training sessions can be rapidly provisioned, recycled and removed without the need to configure physical workstations, servers, and networks. The AMSTE ability to readily orchestrate and alter scenario content and event list in a system of systems architecture allows the training audience to tailor sessions at the point of need. Bringing this level of control closer to the target audience through a cloud and data center structure assures higher fidelity, improved responsiveness and shorter turnaround times. 