Howard Spaulding Training Consultant Arlington, Texas pirate612@cablelynx.com
Critical thinking is widely accepted as a requisite skill for successful military leaders. TodayÕs defense leaders must thwart sudden assaults with preemptive parries and innovative defensive tactics. This requires a level of critical thinking and meta-cognition that is not always found in educational processes today. Effectively enhancing that skill set via a range of training techniques has a well-documented history, but the current application of those techniques remains problematical for a number of reasons. The authors' past and current research is in the use of conversational on-line agents in a number of contexts and in the use of distributed computing and simulation. They assert these can be used to address problems in critical thinking training. These capabilities tender a solution to global application and continuous availability of this training for DoD personnel. The need for critical thinking is taken as a given. A brief survey of effective critical thinking pedagogies is followed by an analysis of which would be most effectively adapted to the distributed simulation/agent environment. Then this paper discusses both the distributed computing simulation capabilities that have been demonstrated and the emerging technologies enabling the delivery of engag- ing conversational agents. These agents are capable of carrying on a life-like verbal exchange with the users. Exam- ples of where and how both the distributed computing and agent interfaces have proven effective are given, with analysis about the impact these capabilities would have on critical thinking training. A discussion is presented con- cerning the relative benefits of using animated agents vice using video clips of live personnel as the response vehicle for the conversation. The efficacy of using an active voice recognition-enabled dialogue instead of a text delivered didactic approach is discussed. The paper closes with a description of how such a system could effectively serve DoD personnel.
