Transforming e-Learning into o-Learning The Power of Organic Learning without the Bells and Whistles Online courseware can support effective training and education; however, e-learning is sometimes lackluster. Courses may bore learners; topics might seem shallow, or students’ content retention may fall below par. Increasing the interactivity of online courseware can boost engagement and learning; however, “increased interactivity” is sometimes just a euphemism for “more technological bells and whistles.” The challenge is further complicated when customers, such as trainers across the joint military enterprise, are either unaware of the full capacity of web-based learning tools or uncertain of how to maximize their utility. Thus, while employing state-of-the-art technology is admirable, what is most needed is a fresh way to use those technologies in more innovative and effective ways, to create tailored training experiences, and to facilitate organic learning (i.e., localized, tailorable). In other words, trainers need support leveraging the considerable e-learning capabilities that already exist, as well as making them personally meaningful and integrating them with other training experiences. In this paper, we examine how to close the gaps mentioned above. We first describe the power of developing organically centered training supported by e-learning technologies. Some of these technologies include tailored online course content and small group scenario trainers, both with embedded metrics to assess individual and team competencies respectively. We then describe how new and different uses of existing e-learning technologies can help joint trainers create rich learning environments designed to best support the needs of their units. In our own work, we have implemented instructional tactics such as situational judgment tests, card sorting using multiple- choice radio buttons, and story-based learning, and we are currently working on methods to capture e-learning content for team-centered part-task training. Finally, we close this paper by describing our next steps, including the andragogical principles we are exploring in our ongoing work to support training for the Chairman’s six Desired Leadership Attributes in technologically supported training environments. 