The Army depends on hundreds of space-reliant munitions and devices to conduct combat operations. This technology gives our forces a strategic advantage over the enemy in any scenario, whether it is through the use of precision-guided munitions (PGM) or battlefield situational awareness tools. Unfortunately, the adversary is well aware of our dependence upon these capabilities and has been developing the aptitude to challenge our unimpeded use of space- reliant assets by creating a denied, degraded, and disrupted space operational environment (D3SOE). The Army is currently under-trained to fight through a D3SOE, and particularly, higher echelons lack the ability to replicate a contested electromagnetic operational environment in training exercises at Mission Command Training Program (MCTP) and joint training events. To address this capability gap, the USASMDC/ARSTRAT along with Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC)-NSC, Program Executive Office Simulation, Training, and Instrumentation (PEO STRI), and the greater Modeling and Simulation (M&S) Community of Interest are developing a simulation solution to train soldiers how to fight through a contested space environment. Sponsored by the Army Modeling and Simulation Office, this effort addresses replicating Global Positioning System (GPS) jamming effects on PGMs. The effort degrades the accuracy of PGMs and affects the Common Operational Picture with respect to unit positions and movements. At the core of this effort is the United States Air Force (USAF) Distributed Mission Operations Center- Space (DMOC-S) developed GPS Environment Generator (GEG) that applies jamming effects to PGMs. The GEG provides precision degradation for various Army PGMs and space-reliant equipment, such as Excalibur, the Army Tactical Missile System, the Guided Multiple-Launch Rocket System, and the Defense Advanced GPS Receivers. The GEG would then provide this information to the Army Joint Land Component Constructive Training Capability (JLCCTC) that uses the information to determine the impacts on units. The resulting training capability will enhance our militarys proficiency in detecting, attributing, and mitigating electronic warfare (EW) effects, greatly enhancing survivability and mission success. 