The Commandant’s Planning Guidance for 2015 states, “My intent is for Marines to encounter their initial ethical and tactical dilemmas in a simulated battlefield vice actual combat” (USMC, 2015). Live training can never be completely replaced, but live training can be optimized or augmented, or both, by preparing in live, virtual, constructive (LVC) training events. However, enabling readiness through training depends on the capabilities of the simulators to enable training of operational tasks as required by training objectives. Typically, however, validation of simulator capabilities is conducted while in stand-alone configuration. Validating simulator capabilities while linked to other simulators in a distributed environment is only now being undertaken. This paper reports on an assessment and analysis methodology based on the systematic team assessment of readiness training (START) process to determine if the method utilized can inform potential validation efforts for future LVC distributed mission training environment (DMTE) exercises. The capabilities of three simulation systems, used in a LVC DMTE were first assessed in stand- alone configuration and then, after conduct of the DMTE exercise, assessed to determine the simulators’ capabilities while in distributed configuration. Then, the stand-alone and distributed configuration START results were compared and analyzed. While general findings of this effort are outside the focus of this paper, the salient take-away is the development of a methodology for identifying simulator capabilities and value-added training delivered in distributed, LVC configurations. A job-aid for validation of distributed systems in the form of a protocol, based on analysis, observations and subject matter expert input was developed and herein provided. This protocol will be employed during a follow-on effort. Accordingly, adjustments and revisions will be made and reported. Implications, downstream application, and potential impacts of this methodology upon validation and verification efforts, LVC simulator requirements, and recommended adjustments to the START process are also discussed. 