The ÒgreyingÓ and ultimate retirement of the current generation of energy (both exploration and power plant operators, but especially nuclear) operators present many challenges: a loss of experience, incomplete knowledge transfer, and the necessity to maintain demanding safety and operating standards. A study conducted by the International Atomic Energy Agency in 2004 (1) regarding the state of the worldwide nuclear industry workforce noted that the first generation of operators (those who commissioned most of the nuclear plants) had retired, but that the next group would be retiring in the next 10 years.
The ten year period has now transpired. In 2011, the Nuclear Energy Institute (2) forecast a need for up to 25,000 workers by 2015. This need was to meet the predicted loss of approximately 38% of the workforce within 5 years. Further, the article quoted Angel Garcia from Southern California Edison Co, who stated,Ó finding applicants with the right skill sets can be even harder. With fewer potential new hires available from the nuclear Navy, there arenÕt a whole lot of people lined up for jobs that have the skills we need.ÓÓ (3)
If the nuclear Navy cannot supply the numbers of operators required to staff the nuclear plants, then other accession sources are required. There is a significant difference in the education and training of operators from the alternative sources, since a great deal of the knowledge gained is theoretical in nature, or might be gained from operations in similar environments, such as conventional power plants. The issue then becomes how to transfer the required knowledge to this group of potential workers. According to research originally performed by Ed Dole and proven by the National Training Laboratory Institute, learners only retain 5% of information taught (and approximately 10 Ð 20% of that either read or obtained using audio visual or video methods) as opposed to nearly 75% using the practice by doing approach. (4)
The Next Generation of the Nuclear Workforce is comprised of ÒmillennialsÓ who are comfortable with technology and spend a large portion of their time with screen media. (5) The millennials who are the predominant part of the next generation of operators have had access to computers throughout their lives and are confident gamers. Virtual Environments (VE) now offer many advantages in presentation, realism, assessment, and robustness heretofore unattainable. Game Engines (GE) combine the fascination of gaming with the necessary theory and skills required for the Energy Industry workforce. Until very recently, the ability to perform significant tasks outside the actual power plant has been either extremely expensive (full scale mock ups) or technically unachievable using gaming technology. The visual capabilities lacked realism, and the other aspects of ÒoperationsÓ such as aural, haptic and olfactory were simply not possible.
