The Reference Model for disease progression combines multiple disease models to predict clinical outcomes. Recent advances allow merging multiple models extracted from multiple populations in different times to best fit multiple cohorts reported by different clinical trials across several decades. Merging the models showed that models are getting outdated due to medical practice improvement. Introducing temporal correction to the models to account for model outdating allows creating a new model combination that improves the fitness. This suggests that future predictions of a model should include temporal correction. This is particularly true when discussing long term predictions such as life expectancy. In this paper, the life expectancy of diabetic patients is assessed categorized by 6 dimensions: age, gender, blood pressure, cholesterol, A1C, and Smoking. Those predictions are compared to predictions made with and without temporal correction to figure out how many life years can be saved by medical progress made during a patients lifetime. Data Farming is a methodology that combines simulation modeling, rapid scenario generation, high performance computing, experimental design, analysis and visualization, and collaborative processes. Data farming is a quantified approach that examines questions in large possibility spaces and evaluates whole landscapes of outcomes to draw insights from outcome distributions and outliers. Data farming has been developed and utilized in many contexts to include a community of interest that has met to implement the methodology in workshops throughout the world. The group recently met for a week in Finland at the 31st workshop on data farming. At this workshop, model development continued through full immersion into the data farming process and many iterations of the data farming process were performed to gain insight into various what-if? questions. A Black Swan event has three characteristics according to author Nassim Nicholas Taleb. First of all, the event is an outlier, i.e. it comes as a surprise. Secondly, the event has a major impact. And finally, the event can be explained after it occurs as if it could have been expected. Because data farming provides the capability of executing enough experiments so that outliers might be captured and examined for insights, it is particularly well suited for analysis of black-swan-type events. This paper describes data farming and a current application. Then it illustrates both successful and potential applications of data farming in the context of questions inherent in military decision-making involving some black-swan-type events. Department of Defense (DoD) organizations are challenged to compile and align Modeling and Simulation (MANDS) information from a combination of data sources across multiple stakeholders. Aggregating useful data and analytics throughout program lifecycles is difficult because current practice typically relies upon static, disconnected, stove- piped sources of information. Digital Engineering (DE) is an emerging concept articulated by Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Systems Engineering (DASD(SE)) designed to strengthen engineering discipline. It is an integrated, model-based approach to support the planning, design, operation, and sustainment of DoD programs. With support from the DoD Modeling & Simulation Coordination Office (DMSCO), the MANDS Workbench was developed as an open source, modular software tool that enables the development of a DE ecosystema digital environment for team collaboration based on authoritative sources of information. This integrated MANDS approach, supported by a digital engineering ecosystem, has been proven effective. The MANDS Workbench is currently utilized by Program Executive Office Integrated Warfare Systems (PEO IWS) providing its MANDS team visibility to hundreds of structured and unstructured data sources and ground truth collaboration throughout all phases of the systems engineering lifecycle. Key benefits of this approach are enhanced communication across the PEO IWS enterprise and increased confidence in delivering the best MANDS outcomes within cost and schedule. Combat training centers run large scale training exercises simulating force on force combat. These centers use a variety of simulation equipment to monitor and control the training exercises. Maintenance and upgrade of the equipment requires both time and money. Different pieces of equipment contribute to the training exercises in distinctive ways. Often training centers encounter time sensitive tasks and limited funding related to simulation equipment maintenance and upgrades. It is important to invest in the equipment which will provide the greatest advantage for training capabilities. Enterprise Architecture (EA) tools have been used to show the relationships between technology and the business capabilities enabled by the technology. The reader will learn results of an investigation into the use of an EA tool to show the relationship between technology in use at a combat training center and the training capabilities available from that technology. The investigation focused on how technology obsolescence impacted training capabilities. In conducting this study, the importance of software upgrades and advancements became apparent. Software often has a shorter life cycle than hardware, but provides an easier upgrade and replacement plan. So system managers benefit from a different view of software obsolescence planning. Through the increased use of virtualization, a single hardware component may run large numbers of software components. The architecture tools provide some visibility into the aggregation of software and the possible risks to training delivery from component interactions. The system manager has increased visibility allowing investments to be targeted in areas where they will achieve more impact on military training capabilities. One of the main limitations in predictive analytics is the acquisition cost of engineering data due to slow-running computer code or expensive experiments. Also, data is often multi-dimensional and highly non-linear in nature, causing problems for standard statistical predictive models. Once data is collected and models are built, many applications require accurate and scalable uncertainty quantification (UQ) solutions to enable robust design and reliable decision making. A modeling framework that addresses these common problems is presented here. The advanced Bayesian modeling framework called GE Bayesian Hybrid Modeling (GEBHM) combines simulation and experimental data sources using machine learning techniques and Bayesian statistics to perform UQ, provides detailed sensitivity reports for design engineers, visualizes the problem and its solution succinctly, and aids in developing next- step plans for decision makers. GEBHM works well for cases with sparse data situations but also handles large-data problems. Fundamentally, GEBHM relies on Markov Chain Monte Carlo techniques for accurately learning the Bayesian model parameters and employs state-of-the-art techniques for self-validation. The GEBHM framework applied to an example engineering design problem requiring FE and/or CFD data is presented. It is demonstrated how the surrogate model is built, how uncertainty sources are quantified and propagated, how the impact of design decisions on performance is quantified, and how the engineering design is optimized. It is shown that the framework is capable of handling problems with limited data, accurately capture the uncertainty, and provide a high level of detail and accuracy for the designers and decision makers. The United States Coast Guard is researching a firehouse type staffing structure for pilots standing watch at the National Capital Region Air Defense Facility (NCRADF). This facility supports the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) providing immediate air protection from low and slow flying threats in the Washington, DC area. This watch currently requires heavy staffing levels to guard the airspace twenty-four hours a day/ year- round. More efficient options are being explored, including the firehouse model which consists of a repetitive cycle of duty days and days off. For this minimal staffing level to be successful, it will need to provide the pilots with adequate flight time and fill all the required watch positions. To test the new firehouse model, a simulation was coded in Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) within Microsoft Excel. The results of the simulation showed a 0% probability that the new model provides adequate staffing to support the national defense mission. Additionally, the staffing structure did not provide the pilots enough flight hours thus negatively impacting the pilots proficiency. Rising stress levels is a significant problem in the USA. The average stress levels increased to 5.1 in 2015 compared to 4.9 in 2014 (American Psychological Association, 2016). People who do not have tools to manage their stress are more likely to acquire cardiovascular disease (CVD)  the leading cause of death in the USA. In Hampton Roads, an average of 23% of Medicare beneficiaries were treated for heart disease (Greater Hampton Roads, 2014). For affected individuals, it not only implies health risks but also increased medical expenditures which can lead to financial issues  the top stressor in the USA. Therefore, interventions are needed to manage the risk of CVD. Harvard Health Publications (2009) indicates that yoga reduces the stress perceived and modulates stress response systems. Sudarshan KriyaYoga (SKY), a form of yogic breathing, is unique method for balancing the autonomic nervous system and influencing psychologic and stress related disorders (Brown & Gerbarg, 2005). An agent-based model was developed in this study to simulate the micro and macro-level impact of adopting SKY in Hampton Roads, particularly on managing stress, preventing CVD and reducing the associated medical expenses. The validation results indicate that the difference between the published results of research studies on SKY and the simulation results are not statistically significant. Simulation results show that people who practice SKY have generally lower and normal SBP, BMI and stress level while those who dont, have generally higher and falls on the high-risk category. The analysis of variance suggests that the increase in SKY population in Hampton Roads provides an extremely significant effect in decreasing the percentage of CVD high risk population, associated expenses and the overall stress level in the region. In addition, advertising SKY offers greater impact on improving the risk factors and reducing the expenses associated to CVD in Hampton Roads. Animal disease outbreaks are a global concern. These outbreaks can cause food scarcity and economic losses, impact animal health, and, if zoonotic, affect human health. For an outbreak of a disease not currently found within a country, these consequences can be greater. Disease modeling is one tool that can be used to better understand disease spread and evaluate different control strategies. USDAAPHISVSCEAH addresses questions related to minimizing the consequences of outbreaks while protecting our nations livestock, food supply, and the environment. Using modeling tools, analysts evaluate alternative control strategies, provide recommendations on planning and effective use of resources, develop surveillance strategies, and estimate the economic impacts of disease control options. In this paper, we used the Animal Disease Spread Model (ADSM) to simulate an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease when introduced from multiple locations on the same day in a seven-state area of the United States. ADSM is a stochastic, spatially explicit compartmental model that simulates herd-to-herd spread of a highly contagious disease. The outbreak scattered in a variety of directions to other herds; however, only a few locations were infected consistently in a high percentage of iterations. Identifying locations at higher risk for disease introduction and/or spread can help decision- makers target risk-based surveillance and control strategies. Since ADSM is a new model available to the global modeling community, this paper also discusses the modeling process required by analysts to parameterize and use the model and highlights how this simulation method can provide useful information for decision-makers. Data sharing is a critical capability that enables the global integration of military forces to combat trans-regional, multi-domain, multi-functional threats. Interoperable command and control systems are prerequisite for a common strategic understanding which promotes unity of effort and effective mission execution. Enabling the warfighter to make decisions and take action at the speed of the problem requires a robust flow of information by accessing and processing authoritative data sources. Secure data sharing is essential to achieving interdependent joint/coalition forces. Due to its distributed nature, data sharing cannot be acquired as a commodity, nor used as an individual weapon system. Unfortunately, there is no single DOD data sharing system, per se. Rather, using standardization and reuse, data sharing must be incorporated into the requirements development, acquisition, and sustainment phases of complex warfighting information system capabilities. Joint Staff (JS) J-6 Deputy Directorate for Cyber and Command, Control, Communications and Computers (C4) Integration (DD C5I) Data and Services Division (DSD) operates within an established Joint Command and Control capability development framework that includes governance, standardized information exchange, and authoritative data source visibility and access. Disparate data producing and consuming systems develop their data service capabilities within a standardized framework to fulfill data sharing needs for decision makers. This paper will describe the DSD activities, challenges, and the way ahead to advance an interdependent joint force by evolving and horizontally integrating interdependent data services as critical joint/coalition data sharing capabilities. During the Cold War, many people around the world felt the immense threat of nuclear warfare. Even as tensions calmed, the development of nuclear arsenals did not. Growth in nuclear weapon testing, political instability, and the increase in terrorist activity make war and war casualties a global concern. The purpose of this project was to simulate, through NetLogo, changes in the world population under a variety of war scenarios. Data about the current population and growth rate for each country that came from the CIA World Factbook were put into a shapefile, which is a geographic information system file. Casualty data from World War I and World War II were also collected and integrated into the shapefile. The program applies the natural growth rate and, if a battle took place, the coefficients derived from Lanchesters Theory of Warfare to the population and updates the map with the population change. The Lanchesters Theory of Warfare uses historical battles and past causalities data. The user can specify the initial soldier amount for both sides of a battle and the factors for each, such as the weapon efficiency, which are used in Lanchesters Theory of Warfare. Furthermore, the user can choose between the World War I data and the World War II data. This process is repeated for each tick, which is the count of days that has passed in the simulation. While the population will inevitably decrease in the case of a war, the different coefficients of war have different impacts on the population. This study reports on an evaluation tool for instructors of a non-traditional vocational program and the effectiveness of providing frequent formative feedback to instructors based on data collected from students. A comprehensive survey on instructional effectiveness was administered across eight urban sites across the USA. Fidelity measures were taken in administrating the survey, which enabled uniform procedures in collecting data and for reporting the data. The vocational training consisted of three 7-week modules that spanned 6 months. Around 3000 students participate in the vocational training program. Students completed the survey after each module. The instructors received the unpacked feedback from the survey administrators in digestible format, as well as through discussions with their academic supervisors. The goal of the feedback framework was to enhance accountability between students and instructors, providing instructional transparency, and narrowing the lag time variance in acting on student feedback. Unlike broad summative assessments carried out at the end of trainings, the content and frequency of the feedback in formative evaluations offered instructors quick insights into their practices and the opportunity to adjust their teaching to students learning styles. The survey was designed based on established educational theories and practices, and instructors were given feedback based on the practices included in the survey. This study showcases the usefulness of formative assessments of instructors based on quantitative and qualitative evaluations over a six-month cycle. Results indicated that the instructors employed suggested teaching practices more frequently in later modules compared to their performance after the first module. 