This paper presents the development of an Ultrasonography Simulator Training Tool. Ultrasonography is a user-dependent technology requiring Operator motor skills for appropriate probe manipulation and cognitive skills to capture images, acquire situational awareness, and interpret pathology. Three challenges arise in developing a cost-effective simulator training tool that provides physical (hardware) and cognitive (software-visualization) learning experiences: 1) ability to place pathology on a body-like shape (mannequin) without attaching sensors to the surface, 2) ability to track and register pathology and the probe using Commercial Off the Shelf gaming devices, and 3) engaging gaming development software for simulating echo patterns of ultrasound beams from animated 3D surface data in real-time and display a realistic 2D dynamic ultrasound image. With medical collaboration this project produces a prototype real-time, dynamic ultrasound simulator trainer specific for cardiac interrogation. It accommodates extendable dedicated teaching components with additional 3d anatomical data and teaching materials for instructor observation capability. Safe civilian ports are a critical aspect of our infrastructure and our economy. Asymmetric threats against them have grown in both diversity and intensity. Advances in autonomous systems are evolving to counter these threats - and doing so effectively within constraints of shrinking budgets and personnel. This paper describes the Riverscout project - a significant technological advance to improve port security through the use of low cost, commercially available unmanned surface vehicles (USV) for monitoring and reconnaissance. Key benefits described in the paper include optics, to allow remote patrolling operations; onboard sensors, to detect threats; and an MANDS-based training suite, to enable training based on the actual platform. A reconnaissance mission typically starts in autonomous mode with the USV following pre-planned waypoints. When any target is detected, the operator switches to manual remote mode to further interrogate. Riverscouts autonomous capability reduces personnel requirements and provides standoff for crew protection. As part of the Phase 1 efforts of NASAs UAS-in-the-NAS Project a task was initiated to explore the merits of developing a system simulation capability for UAS to address airworthiness certification requirements. The core of the capability would be a software representation of an unmanned vehicle, including all of the relevant avionics and flight control system components. The specific system elements could be replaced with hardware representations to provide Hardware-in-the-Loop (HWITL) test and evaluation capability. The UAS Systems Integration and Validation Laboratory (UAS-SIVL) was created to provide a UAS-systems integration, validation, and diagnostics hardware-in-the-loop simulation capability. This paper discusses how SIVL provides a robust and flexible simulation framework that permits the study of failure modes, effects, propagation paths, criticality, and mitigation strategies to help develop safety, reliability, and design data that can assist with the development of certification standards, means of compliance, and design best practices for civil UAS. A model of strategy formulation is used to study how an adaptive attacker learns to overcome a moving target cyber defense. The attacker-defender interaction is modeled as a game in which a defender deploys a temporal platform migration defense. Against this defense, a population of attackers develop strategies specifying the temporal ordering of resource investments that bring targeted zero-day exploits into existence. Attacker response to two defender temporal platform migration scheduling policies are examined. In the first defender scheduling policy, the defender selects the active platform in each match uniformly at random from a pool of available platforms. In the second policy the defender schedules each successive platform to maximize the diversity of the source code presented to the attacker. Adaptive attacker response strategies are modeled by finite state machine (FSM) constructs that evolve during simulated play against defender strategies via an evolutionary algorithm. It is demonstrated that the attacker learns to invest heavily in exploit creation for the platform with the least similarity to other platforms when faced with a diversity defense, while avoiding investment in exploits for this least similar platform when facing a randomization defense. Additionally, it is demonstrated that the diversity-maximizing defense is superior for shorter duration attacker-defender engagements, but performs sub-optimally in extended attacker-defender interactions. Even though the architecture of Inertial Navigation Systems (INS) remains relatively constant, a designer is faced with numerous choices when it comes to identifying the appropriate sensors, selecting among similar sensors and configuring the appropriate filtering. Software tools that can simulate an INS are frequently used so support a specific INS model but there are relatively few general purpose tools that support arbitrary INS topologies. In this paper we describe a framework that supports modeling and simulation of INS. The framework is not tied to a specific INS topology and allows modeling at an arbitrary level of detail. Some novel features of the framework include a data dictionary that contains the system interface specification and which allows automated checking of the interfaces between modules, a scenario generator that can automatically generate Monte Carlo simulations based on specific input parameters, and a data-aware post-processor that can compactly display simulation results. The paper describes the framework and provides examples of its usage. SUMMIT is a Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate-sponsored software environment for connecting simulation tools that enable the emergency preparedness community to more effectively and economically prepare for and respond to real and potential incidents. SUMMIT allows users to dynamically link, configure and execute a library of models and data sources. All integrated model configuration and result displays cannot be developed a priori as the library of data types and available models continues to expand and because SUMMITs users have different visualization requirements (desktop applications, mobile clients, virtual worlds). We present a data type-centered methodology, and its use in national and regional level exercises, to meet the above challenges. Using a configurable system of data representations, SUMMIT is able to dynamically generate visual representations for data based on the interfaces of the linked models. This approach allows users to make use of disparate modeling capabilities across a variety of tools in unanticipated ways while maintaining a consolidated user interface. Since 2006, Congress has stressed the importance of increasing Science Technology Engineering and Mathematic (STEM) majors to meet 21st Century workforce demands (Hanushek, Peterson,& Woessmann, 2012; Carnevale, Smith, & Melton, 2011). While previous studies have analyzed the relationship among factors that influence students choice of a STEM major (Wang, 2012; Lent et al, 2005), no studies have used a grounded theory approach to develop a theoretical model. One of the benefits of using grounded theory is that the model can explain not only what influence students choices of a STEM major but also why. The primary data source for this pilot study was an individual, 30-45 minute, semi-structured, face-to-face interview with six undergraduate college students majoring in STEM fields recruited from the same undergraduate STEM Education and Professional Studies course. The semi-structured interview asked questions about participants experiences choosing their majors. At the end of the interview, data were transcribed and e-mailed to students for member checking. Results indicate emergence of six domains to explain choice of major: interest in STEM, workforce demand, academic support, early environment, self-achievement, and social support. Trends for the choice of majors are presented along with the design of an initial model. Further development of this model will include a system dynamic simulation for educators and policy makers to estimate how specific strategies change the number of students majoring in STEM. Typically, commercially available modeling and simulation products are tools that allow Modeling and Simulation (MANDS) practitioners to construct, run, and analyze simulations. These products are useful only to professionals in the MANDS field who know how to properly construct a model and generate the required analysis. This necessitates the use of commercial products in conjunction with a professional to sell modeling and simulation as a service. In certain situations, customers may not want to purchase a service, but a tool that they can use themselves. This paper presents an approach to MANDS which results in a standalone tool. The tool in this example was developed specifically for use in a manufacturing setting, not by the MANDS professional, but by the people in charge of planning and executing the work. By shaping the inputs and the analysis to align with the customers knowledge base, a non- MANDS user can complete simulations with little or no assistance from the experts that developed the model. In the mid-2000s, Combat Profiling emerged as a critical skill required by Warfighters for proactively identifying human threats (Wang-Costello, Tarr, and Marriffino, 2013). As this training evolves from a live, classroom-based paradigm to distributed virtual training, accurately representing biometric cues becomes increasingly important. Simulating facial cues, such as sweating, challenges system developers due to available technological capabilities (e.g., texturing protocols in standard simulation platforms) and a lack of clear design criteria. The purpose of this research is to identify requirements and design recommendations for representing behavior cues in simulation-based training (SBT). This paper aims to provide developers with design guidelines for accurately depicting biometric cues in virtual environments. Specifically, the authors present three common biometric cues used in Combat Profiling (e.g., reddening of the face, pallor, and sweating), discuss the potential underlying causes of each cue, explain the importance of skin tone, and provide visual representations for each cue. 