The magnitude of current through a conical nanochannel filled with an electrolyte solution depends on the polarity of the applied bias, indicating an asymmetric diode-like current-voltage (I-V) curve. This kind of phenomenon refers to current rectification and it indicates that there is a preferential direction for ion flow in the asymmetrical nanochannels. In this study, the rectification phenomenon through an asymmetrical nanochannel simultaneously subjected to an electric field and electrolyte concentration gradient is numerically investigated. A mathematical model consisting of the PNP equations has been developed. The obtained simulation results are in great agreement with the literature. In this research, the effect of the imposed electrolyte concentration gradient on the current rectification has been studied for the first time. We demonstrate a model-based systems engineering (MBSE) approach to analyzing how information resources and the policies that govern their use impact security workflows. This approach establishes a crucial connection between workflow and the information sharing environment and enables the formative evaluation of candidate interventions designed to enhance security, such as new information systems and data standards. We (1) modeled the use and generation of security information in support of marine terminal operations and (2) analyzed security as a service in support of those operations. Our approach uses extensions of the Object Management Groups (OMG) Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) standard and integrates workflow modeling with an information dictionary that records and automatically generates task-specific information requirements. The scope of the model we present is containerized cargo operations at a commercial marine terminal. The approach, which connects work activity to information flow, can be applied to analyze trade-offs between better information resources and more physical resources and to identify where and how future systems and programs will impact current operations. We discuss how the MBSE technique of generating the information dictionary aligns with important federal efforts to capture essential information exchange requirements. Newport News Shipbuilding (NNS) is the sole builder of Navy aircraft carriers in the United States. Constructing and overhauling Navy aircraft carriers is among the most complex work undertaken anywhere in the world. An integral part of these operations is efficient material logistics. Utilization of material laydown and construction areas during the creation and outfitting of new carriers presents a unique challenge for both material logistics personnel and trades workers. As the ship construction process progresses, multiple factors limit the workers ability to maintain the planned schedule of work packages and jobs. Due to the shifting nature of what work is available on any given day, material logistics personnel are constantly asked to update their plans to deliver and store materials onsite. The creation of a tool to help both the trade workers and the material logistics team visualize how shifting work plans impact material laydown strategies. This will reduce touch times and eliminate lost, damaged or underutilized materials. The carrier construction material logistics tool will allow NNS to model the process of creation and outfitting through placement in the dry dock, to demonstrate the feasibility of such a model and demonstrate its benefits. Following successful creation of the initial model, users will be able to see into digital work-packages allowing them to re-plan on the fly and evaluate how these new plans will impact material flow. Users will also be able to determine if material availability, or lack thereof, will require alteration to the work- package construction sequence. Emergent air vehicles types, such as unmanned air vehicles (UAVs), have the potential to augment the benefits of aviation by offering new capabilities. However, the current air traffic management (ATM) system, which relies on centralized air traffic control (ATC), cannot accommodate the integration of these new vehicles with preexisting aircraft. Through the Autonomous Departure and Arrival Procedures and Technology (ADAPT) concept, NASA Langley Research Center (NASA-LaRC) will systematically develop a solution that incorporates these new vehicles into a decentralized ATC environment. NASA will construct a set of protocols, or Rules of the Road (ROR), which are the logical rules that each air vehicle uses to self-manage operations for travel. To assist NASA with its experimental testing, the 2015-2016 Old Dominion University Modeling and Simulation Engineering Capstone Team will design and develop a simulation software framework, FAST (Framework for ADAPT Simulated Testing), which incorporates agent-based modeling and simulation support components. FAST alone provides functionality for many- vehicle flight simulation and travel mission completion, but requires NASA to complete the simulation through the addition of ROR-related logic to add conflict detection and resolution capability. FAST and the other tools developed by the capstone class will allow NASA to quickly implement, test, and analyze their ROR models. This paper discusses the complete software architecture, which includes and supports FAST, and the capabilities of the system components. It will discuss each component, individually, of the FAST architecture which includes a vehicle repository, input editor, simulator, output analyzer, and visualization tool. Cellular Dynamics During Epicutaneous Immunotherapy Using Agent Based Modeling Food allergies are a growing public concern where strict avoidance of the offending allergen prevents life threatening allergic reactions. Recently, results from epicutaneous allergen specific immunotherapy (EPIT) clinical trials have been promising, where this method of treatment may become an attractive treatment option for food allergy sufferers in the future. While this evidenced based therapy is encouraging, many of the underlying mechanisms of allergen specific desensitization remain unknown. Langerhans Cells (LC), a specialized dendritic cell, are potent antigen presenting cells that reside mainly in the epidermis where they scan the microenvironment for pathogens and foreign material. Recent studies have shown LC are important mediators of immunotolerance, where they exert selective control over tolerance and immunity. In order to uncover some of the complex cellular interactions between immune cells during EPIT, a novel agent based model was developed and analyzed to describe how transdermal administration of peanut allergens stimulate the migration of Langerhans cells from the epidermis to the regional lymph nodes. The epidermal and dermal layers of the skin along with lymphatic vessels were modeled in Netlogo3D. Fine-tuned agent based models focused on EPIT may elucidate enigmatic mechanisms governing EPIT which could be useful in customizing treatment plans based on patient specific parameters and optimizing therapeutic outcomes.      For conventional fixed wing and rotary wing aircraft a variety of modeling and simulation tools have been developed to provide designers the means to thoroughly investigate proposed designs and operational concepts. However, lighter-than-air (LTA) airships, hybrid air vehicles, and aerostats have some important aspects that are different from heavier-than-air (HTA) vehicles. In order to account for these differences, modifications are required to the standard design tools to fully characterize the LTA vehicle design and performance parameters. To address these LTA design and operational factors, LTA development organizations have created unique proprietary modeling tools, often at their own expense. An expansion of this limited LTA tool set could be accomplished by leveraging existing modeling and simulation capabilities available in the National laboratories and public research centers. Development of an expanded set of publicly available LTA modeling and simulation tools for LTA developers would mitigate the reliance on proprietary LTA design tools in use today. A set of well researched, open source, high fidelity LTA design modeling and simulation tools would advance LTA vehicle development and also provide the analytical basis for accurate LTA operational cost assessments. This paper will present the modeling and analysis tool capabilities required for LTA vehicle design, analysis of operations, and full life-cycle support. A survey of the tools currently available will be assessed to identify the gaps between their capabilities and the LTA industry's needs. Options for development of new modeling and analysis capabilities to supplement contemporary tools will also be presented.    In this paper we present methods, process and algorithms to decipher the hidden rules or logic of complex traffic patterns  traces of assets, people and equipment -- and demonstrate technologies for Automated Rule Learning from Data Traces. We call this system for automated rule learning from data traces - TraceLogic. We demonstrate this technology on aircraft carriers. Operations on aircraft carriers are often described as controlled chaos. Complex organizational systems, such as those that govern and effect aircraft movement onboard carriers, do not operate on predetermined low level rules but rather adapt and learn based on high-level guidelines. Critical situations that are often new or unique are best tackled by adaptive and well-trained organizations. We present typical examples of data statistics, visual analytics, and rule and pattern analysis from carrier deck notional data. These techniques help analysts explore the data and improve the operational process. These tools could also support Validation and Verification (V&V) of the rules engine of the simulator. The algorithms and logic developed in TraceLogic are scalable across domains. The TraceLogic methodology, algorithms and tools have a number of potential customers in the Navy community, the broader Department of Defense community and the commercial sector. This technology will scale to manage any asset moving in groups subject to complex spatio-temporal constraints. Some of the possible application domains are depot maintenance, manufacturing shop floor, airport traffic management and even theme parks where people move in groups. The U.S. Army is continuously looking for novel and innovative methods and technology to enhance operational and tactical simulation-based training (SBT) for its soldiers. Through the Military OpenSimulator Enterprise Strategy (MOSES) project, the U.S. Army Research Laboratory is identifying critical software features that will improve the next generation of military simulations training effectiveness. At present, MOSES is investigating methods to increase the number of simultaneous soldiers that can train in a three-dimensional (3D), virtual world simulator. The current limitation of simultaneous trainees in a high-fidelity environment is approximately 16-44 soldiers, representing the platoon echelon in the U.S. Army. This limitation is unfortunate as the Army requires the next generation of SBTs to support training at the company echelon of (100-200) soldiers. The presented work investigated a common limiting factor in virtual world simulations, the physics engine. We compared the physical load limits of three physics engines; Open Dynamics Engine (ODE), Bullet, and PhysX. These engines were studied because they are common in video games, special effects for television and film, and 3D simulations. More specifically, ODE was the first physics engine implemented for the virtual world simulator, OpenSimulator (OpenSim). BulletSim is an award-winning and industry-recognized engine that is the current default OpenSim physics engine using the BulletSim wrapper. PhysX is the latest real-time physics engine from Nvidia that has been recently integrated into OpenSim. With this study, other simulation users, developers, and administrators gain a quantifiable method to compare physics capabilities among computer-based systems. The current generation of synthetic simulated tissues in medical trainers is adequate for basic training, but they often fall short of delivering the fidelity necessary to build muscle memory. This problem has been overlooked by users because there is no standard method for describing how tissues should behave during medical procedures. The Department of Defense is working to develop tissue performance requirements that can be referenced during the development of future generations of medical simulations. The first step is to determine how closely synthetic tissues mimic the behaviors of the human tissues being simulated. This paper compares mechanical properties of human pleura against simulated pleura used in thoracostomy training. Thoracostomy, or chest tube insertion, is a surgical intervention where a tube is inserted between the ribs to drain fluid and air from the chest cavity. Without it, pressure builds in the chest and eventually the lungs will collapse. A collapsed lung, or tension pneumothorax, is the second most common preventable cause of death on the battlefield according to the Tactical Combat Casualty Care (TC3) curriculum. Many commercial medical simulators train this procedure and nearly all of them use synthetic materials to simulate the haptic pop felt when the pleura is breached. This paper measures the mechanical properties of those materials and compares them against the same mechanical properties measured from human pleura. Comparisons include tensile stress, stretch ratio, and strain energy density. This paper builds on the procedures and results presented by Norfleet, Lobo Fenoglietto, and Mazzeo at MODSIM 2015. Newport News Shipbuilding is the only shipyard that builds nuclear powered aircraft carriers and is one of only two companies that build nuclear powered submarines for the U.S. Navy. In addition to constructing these, one of the many services that Newport News Shipbuilding provides is the periodic overhaul of existing U.S. Navy aircraft carriers. These aircraft carriers have thousands of compartments that require various work activities at varying extents. This paper presents a simulation project effort aimed at simulating the work activities, predicting work completion milestones for comparison with scheduled milestones, and showing the current status of work during the overhaul process. This problem space and project effort required a specific modeling and simulation approach that differs from most typical discrete event simulation models, primarily because the duration of individual work activities is determined based on the scope of the work, not an assigned length of time. This paper will summarize the problem space, the approach, the resulting tool, and its use cases. 