Current simulation-based training focuses on hardware-based capabilities installed at forward deployed and designated military and civilian training sites. Learners must conform to training center schedules and resource limitations. These individual site installations require dedicated support for trainer operations, maintenance, network, and information assurance. Moreover, software updates and configuration changes are difficult and expensive to coordinate, given dispersed installations. Geographically dispersed learners need access to training more rapidly with reduced overhead and lifecycle costs. Ideally, these learners would have access to a broad- spectrum of training media, such as simulations, at their home-stations or training sites without the extensive infrastructure to support full simulation systems. The cloud, networked remote-servers accessed via the internet, may solve this problem by providing broad access while localizing infrastructureTraining on Demand (TOD). This paper gives a brief review of the current state-of-the-art in providing simulation-based training and the challenges in moving it to the cloud. We describe a solution that allows for platform-independent deployment of simulation and game-based training from tablets to personal computers over cellular, WIFI, and broadband network connections, whether government- or commercial-based. We conclude with use-case results and a discussion of future development-research required. Creating an experimental prototype simulation involves many project management, design, and development considerations. By highlighting the case of the Client Assessment Practice Simulation (CAPS) and its development from concept to working prototype, the authors hope to provide insight for similar teams undertaking similar projects. CAPS is a simulation for social work students to practice client interviewing skills in a medical setting and also be evaluated on those skills in a recorded and standardized way. Creating it required individuals of multiple disciplines from different university departments to communicate and make decisions. Through literature and existing product review as well as agile communication techniques that involve rapid and paper prototyping, the goals for CAPS came into clarity for all of the stakeholders early on. Frequent and regular communication allowed the stakeholders to stay engaged as the project evolved. The production approach by E2i Creative Studio at the University of Central Floridas Institute for Simulation and Training was also agile in nature. This paper provides an overview of the tools and techniques used to approach CAPS development so teams with similar goals involving mixed and unique disciplines can gain insight on starting and completing a multidisciplinary simulation project of an experimental nature. This paper discusses the development and application of an analytical assessment methodology anchored in systems engineering principles, affordance theory, and human abilities, to measure the potential of an integrated training environments (ITE) ability to effectively support training. An integrated training environment is defined as any human in-the-loop training system that includes live, virtual, constructive, or game supported training aids, devices, simulators, or simulations (TADSS) alone or in combination, that support the deliberate practice of skills for defined mission tasks. Empirical investigation of ITEs is costly, lacks formal guidance, and is therefore often unreliable. If conducted, ad hoc studies, commissioned by individual organizations, constitute the current state of Army ITE evaluation. These assessments are often entirely based on subjective opinions gained through surveys, which produce results that are at best indirectly and loosely linked to the ITEs themselves. What is required is a repeatable, inexpensive, analytical approach to ITE assessment that bounds the potential of a given system to the support it provides to the deliberate practice of specific tasks. The results of this research include the development and use of the integrated training environment assessment methodology (ITEAM). ITEAM was used to evaluate the ability of several ITEs to support the deliberate practice of specific tasks during training. During application, ITEAM consistently predicted where training was supported by an ITE and generally how well. ITEAM is offered as a tool for assessing ITE utility post fielding and as a guide for defining and verifying ITE requirements during the systems engineering development process. The Advanced Distributed Learning (ADL) Initiative has developed the Training and Learning Architecture (TLA) with the goal of using information technology to change the paradigm of education from occasional classroom study and training to pervasive and lifelong activity. TLA views education content providers as services that produce educational content relevant to particular learning needs and contexts. A content brokering service assesses an individual learners current learning needs, and recommends content that is suitable to those needs but also appropriate to the situation the learner is in (e.g., recommending listening to a particular podcast if the learner is driving somewhere). Key technologies for the TLA vision are a Learning Record Store (LRS), which stores a continuously updated record of learning activity and outcomes, as well as a content meta-tagging language that enables the mapping of particular educational tools and content to specific situations. One challenge associated with content meta-tagging is that it requires significant manual effort, especially as content and technologies change. TLA also does not yet have a capability to identify new meta-tags or relationships between existing tags, implying that it may miss some opportunities for effective instruction. We describe a new research effort called FLUENT (Fast Learning from Unlabeled Episodes for Next-generation Tailoring), which will learn new tags and relationships to improve the overall coverage and effectiveness of content delivery in TLA. FLUENT will use a hybrid machine- learning approach that includes episodic learning, heuristic search based on analogical mapping, and an explanation- based learning capability that uses a background knowledge base of causation in instruction to discover relationships from examples. The knowledge-based learning approach will allow effective learning in a domain where statistical learning methods would suffer from the sparse data available. The Armys Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) has described plans for modernizing Army training in documents such as the Army Learning Model (ALM, TRADOC PAM 525-8-2). The ALM calls for increasing the personalization of the soldier learning process so that training is tailored to the individual soldier throughout his/her career. In our previous efforts to address this goal, we conducted research to determine the extent to which using an adaptive training approach would improve soldier performance in unstabilized gunnery simulators. Using the Experience API (xAPI) data specification, performance data from an individual gunner was used to adapt crew training. We compared performance between crews that received an adaptive curriculum based on the gunners performance in the individual gunnery trainer and crews that received a standard curriculum without adaptive elements. Our research suggests that using an adaptive training curriculum led to a significant reduction in the amount of time to train with comparable final qualification scores. While the data is promising, the applicability of the results is limited in that the crew training was adapted based on the performance of the gunner, not the entire crew. This paper describes the implementation of a fully adaptive crew curriculum and the study for validation with active duty soldiers. In addition to assessing training efficiency, we will assess the extent to which adaptive training improves team knowledge. We predict adaptive training will not only result in more effective training for the individuals in the crew but also for the crew as a cohesive unit. the Department of Homeland Security has developed a national strategic program geared toward education, the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers and Studies (NICCS). This program has developed the National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework which provides a blueprint to categorize, organize, and describe cybersecurity work into Specialty Areas, tasks, and knowledge, skills and abilities (KSAs) (NICCS, 2015). Cyber Security Instruction Environment (CYSTINE) for penetration testing with cognitive agent defenders and 3) the use of red-team verse blue-team, live simulation, exercises as realistic, challenging experiences for computer network defense. Learning experience design (LX) is a subset of user experience design (UX) that addresses the synthesis of learning sciences, human-computer interaction, and design thinking. Learning experience design puts the learner at the center of the design process. As the MODSIM community increasingly develops more immersive simulations and persistent experiences with virtual/mixed/augmented/synthetic realities, it may be useful to employ a metaphor to guide design and bring to the fore initial assumptions, biases, or expectations that may make their way into the design of learning experiences for military end users. Therefore the present paper utilizes the interactive storytelling metaphor of the Star Trek Next Generation holodeck to guide learning experience design and serve as a widely recognizable cultural metaphor. This perspective provides a basis for elaborating the holodeck metaphor in ways that may be relevant to identify challenges and opportunities for developers of virtual/mixed/augmented/synthetic realities. The present paper introduces the notion of the social construction of narrative, describes a framework for simulation experience design, and presents some challenges and opportunities that may impact the design of learning experiences in immersive simulation environments.    As part of the U.S. Joint Staffs Bold Quest coalition capability demonstration and assessment event, Nations, Services and Programs (N/S/P) pool resources in a recurring cycle of capability development, demonstration and analysis. Bold Quest provides a venue where N/S/P can demonstrate integrated Live, Virtual and Constructive (LVC) environments, improve interoperability, and build and maintain joint fires proficiency. Unfortunately, LVC environments are, in practice, almost never plug and play. Due to the number of simulation standards, and the various ways that systems are allowed to comply with these standards, simply adhering to a standard is no guarantee of interoperability. Bold Quest 15.2 provided the first opportunity to extend this LVC environment to partner nation simulator sites in France and Canada. French Air Force Joint Terminal Attack Controllers at the Air-Ground Operations School in Nancy-Ochey Airbase in France conducted virtual close air support missions with a U.S. Special Operations Command (USSOCOM) virtual AC-130 trainer at Hurlburt Field, Florida. A Canadian infantry section at the Canadian Army Simulation Centre in Kingston, Ontario conducted virtual missions with U.S., Canadian and Danish units at Fort Bliss, Texas and U.S. squads at Camp Atterbury, Indiana. Despite a number of simulator interoperability issues, these events were generally a success. However, these fundamental interoperability issues are widely recognized, ongoing problems that stand as a significant barrier to improving multi-Service and multinational simulator interoperability. This paper discusses the interoperability challenges faced during Bold Quest 15.2, outlines some of the solutions developed, and offers recommendations for improving joint and coalition simulator interoperability. The Programs of Instruction (POIs) at the U.S. Army Medical Simulation Training Centers (MSTCs) rely on rugged and reliable training aides to include Part Task Trainers (PTTs) to provide effective emergency medicine training of lifesaving procedures and critical skills. In order to create an immersive training experience, training models must be anatomically correct and provide accurate physiological responses. However, in regards to venipuncture and phlebotomy training models, available technologies are often inadequate due to a lack of anatomical and physiological accuracy. A recent evaluation of currently available technology concluded that there has been little innovation or improvement in vascular access training models; many follow the same design and utilize similar materials. Most PTTs simulate vasculature utilizing a single latex tube, the majority of the simulated skins are opaque in color, and they have limited elasticity. These shortcomings prevent the learner from developing the skill of using his or her visual senses to observe the vessels below a translucent skin surface, as can be done on human patients. The limited elasticity of the materials is a challenge when trying to replace or remove the skin from the inner IV arm cores. This paper will discuss the work completed to develop a high fidelity prototype venipuncture and phlebotomy PTT while focusing on advancing the material science to provide more realistic tissue. An update will be provided to the usability study that includes additional participants across the continuum of care. At point of injury, military medical personnel are faced with traumatic life-threatening injuries that often need immediate vascular access for the delivery of fluids and medications. In a pre-hospital setting, lack of immediate vascular access during patient resuscitation and stabilization can be fatal. When traditional methods of vascular access (e.g., intravenous (IV)) are difficult or infeasible, alternative methods are vital to access the circulatory system to deliver fluids and medications. Humeral Head Intraosseous infusion (HHIO) is the process of delivering fluids directly into the bone marrow space of the humerus to provide a non-collapsible entry point into the circulatory system. This technique has proven to be extremely effective when used in emergency situations where intravenous access is not feasible. Intraosseous infusion for emergency purposes has a long history of use dating back to the 1920s. The use of the IO space reached a peak during World War II, when it was used by combat medics to assist soldiers exhibiting signs of hemorrhagic shock. IO re-emerged as a viable alternative during recent conflicts due to advances in technology and is part of the Tactical Combat Casualty Care (TCCC) guidelines when IV access is not feasible. This paper will discuss the user-centric methodology and challenges encountered when developing a high fidelity model to support the training of medical personnel during the small business innovative research (SBIR) Phase II. The feedback received as a part of the usability study was utilized to guide the Phase II design. Faced with an ever-changing technical environment, the need to create effective and inspiring content, and in many cases, a shrinking budget, it is critical for eLearning managers to know how to build and maintain a technically savvy, creative, and cost-effective team. Producing and pricing engaging eLearning is a challenge that, in many instances, cannot be achieved using a one person/one authoring tool solution it requires a team. Determining the correct mix of people is key to successfully delivering profitable and effective training. In this paper, we will examine the actions required to meet these challenges, leveraging research data from leading industry sources. We will describe the characteristics and cost data associated with eLearning professionals specifically, instructional systems designers, web programmers, and digital artists. We will examine the driving factors/differentiators for pricing training products. Finally, we will present an algorithmic solution for determining the correct mix of professionals required to design and develop eLearning content, given specifications such as interactivity level, complexity of subject, need for original visual media, amount of content, etc. 