This paper presents work sponsored by Phase I Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) funding from the Office of Naval Research to develop a system that combines valuable aspects of intelligent tutoring systems and human-to- human adaptive training to aid instructors in providing individualized training. Our system, the Virtual Observer Controller for Adaptive Training (VOCAT), is an adaptive, intelligent virtual observer controller that has been built and demonstrated to run end-to-end in a synthetic training event example. Human instructors recognize that observed student actions may be the result of many possible cognitive reasoning paths and are able to provide student-specific guidance accordingly. VOCAT aims to aid instructors and enhance human-led adaptive training by reflecting on student-specific cognitive process models in order to: 1) identify how and when to provide student- specific guidance during training and 2) identify students' cognitive reasoning behind key decision points for use in an after action review. Each year, the Joint Staff J7 (Joint Training) organizes numerous large-scale joint and coalition training events. These challenging, fast-paced exercises include a wide range of training objectives that must be accomplished on an intense schedule and (particularly of late) on a constricted budget. Military leaders, therefore, are continuously searching for ways to enrich the events training outcomes without inflating their costs. Over the last three years, the Joint Staff J7, Deputy Director for Joint Training has developed, tested, and deployed a Blended LearningTraining System to enhance joint training and efficiently help identify and fill knowledge gaps across the joint training continuum. The system provides Combatant Commands and Joint Force Commands with options to maximize their training by blending online learning activities, metrics and assessments, and in-resident academics and table top exercises, that also includes distributed small-group simulation-based part-task trainers, and tailored feedback mechanisms that are all built into the Joint Event Life Cycle. This paper briefly reviews the development process and current status of the Blended LearningTraining System, and then it discusses two future joint training enhancements that the system now facilitates: (1) multi-lifecycle planning to integrate training events and (2) increased support for Mission Command within joint training.     To succeed in their mission, todays military ground forces must maintain constant awareness, accurately assess possible threats, anticipate enemy actions, and preemptively address dangers by reading subtle cues within the complex battlespace. In other words, military must possess keen perceptual skills. Unfortunately, explicit perceptual training is rarely offered to most enlisted personnel. Thus, our broad research goals are to better define a continuum of perceptual skills and develop a range of instructional methodologies and technologies to support their instruction for military personnel. We began this effort by first examining the existing academic literature, seeking a readymade catalog of perceptual skills to use as an organizing framework for our research. However, existing theory lacks sufficient precision for our applied training task. Consequently, because a suitable roadmap of perceptual skills could not be found, we sought to develop one. In this paper we discuss the creation process of our perceptual cognitive skills taxonomy. First, we briefly describe 15 taxonomies related to perception that provide insight into perceptual training but fail to comprehensively define the range of perceptual skills. Second, we discuss three best practices for the development of a comprehensive skill taxonomy, which we uncovered through our development process. Finally, we close the paper by briefly describing our proposed taxonomy of perceptual cognitive skills. Interest in using game technologies to improve workplace skills has been growing in recent years. While there are several potential advantages for a game-based training approach (cf. Cannon-Bowers & Bowers, 2011), a number of challenges confront developers who seek to create the technology. The greatest challenge is the need to rethink and integrate several traditional processes and resources, including front-end analysis, developing and managing art assets, programing within a game engine, play testing prototype versions of the game, and ultimately measuring training effectiveness. Each of these must be balanced against cost and schedule constraints. In this paper, we discuss an innovative, comprehensive approach to developing game based training on a large scale for the Navys Littoral Combat Ship, and demonstrate how it can be generalized to other applications. Nearly ten years ago, the training and modeling and simulations (MANDS) communities teamed up to tackle a burgeoning issue  the use of commercial technologies and games in NATO. The challenge came from the cultural change inherent in the domain. Small businesses were the leaders in the game space, yet they were perceived as risks among acquisition authorities. The proponents pushed forward by forming a Modeling and Simulation Group workshop series called Exploiting Commercial Technologies and Games for Use in NATO to bridge the cultural gaps. Over ten years, twelve workshops have convened. Successes have been achieved and predictions made five years ago have been attained. This report provides (a) findings such as trends and possible explanations for factors contributing to attainment of workshop predications; (b) trends within technology, industry, and government with respect to commercial technologies and games for education and training; and (c) recommendations for consideration in planning future MSG commercial technology and games workshops. Developing effective virtual environment scenarios that involve human participants is a challenging task because of the difficulty associated with anticipating and responding to all possible reactions of the human participant as the scenario unfolds. Further complicating the task in immersive simulations is the need to accommodate multiple interaction modalities that go beyond direct keyboard and mouse input, examples of which include gestures, use of domain-specific props, and voice recognition. In this paper, we present an approach to modeling an immersive virtual environment aimed at training surgical procedures, the Virtual Operating Room (VOR). In the VOR, trainees interact with a surgical team comprised of real and virtual team members in a standard OR, incorporating real and virtual equipment. Scenarios in the VOR are described using a concurrent state machine methodology that supports non-linear scenario specifications with manageable complexity, even for heavily multi-branch scenarios. The main execution engine utilizes a flexible architecture that allows integration of external control signals that can affect scenario evolution. The paper describes the architecture and provides an example of a scenario addressing laparoscopic cholecystectomy moderated in real time through user voice recognition, instrument manipulation and hardware-based performance assessment. The voice recognition system utilizes a semantic interpretation grammar that allows detection of semantic responses even when spoken using different sentence patterns. A realistic physical simulation of an instrumented abdominal cavity is used to measure task-related performance. The voice recognition system and instrumented abdomen inform the virtual characters who can provide task-specific and summative feedback to the trainee. As motor vehicle crashes remain the leading cause of death for teens, effective driver training continues to be a major public health concern. Teen driver and peer passenger deaths account for almost 25% of total teen deaths from any cause, more than cancer, homicide and suicide. In fact, motor vehicle crashes are the LEADING CAUSE OF DEATH for U.S. teens, accounting for more than one in three deaths in this age group. Accordingly, educators are searching for novel ways to incorporate game-oriented technology to re-design motor vehicle education. As the MANDS community is aware, simulation can provide a training framework that is safe, authentic, controllable, and repeatable. Particularly over the last decade, video gaming systems have increasingly been found in applications more diverse than just entertainment, including training, education, research, and simulation. Computerized simulations designed explicitly for educational purposes can serve as a powerful training resource. By implementing game-based simulation training tools that are geared towards young drivers, there is a potential to greatly improve standardized practices in young driver training by improving cognitive, mechanical, visual, and auditory driver skills at an early age. The focus of this paper is to present a case study that serves as a first step towards motor vehicle training curriculum re-design, incorporating game-based MANDS as a core component. This case study emphasizes Backward Design, which first looks at desired outcomes to properly design effective instructional methods and performance assessments. This case study will: emphasize distractions and inattention (one of the Top 5 causes for teen driving accidents), offer recommendations for standardizing MANDS technology in education and training, and emphasize examples of applying MANDS technology in the stated context. The purpose of this paper is to describe how real aircraft test sets may be a viable option for use on simulated maintenance training devices. The decision to utilize two real aircraft test sets on the UH-60M Black Hawk Electrical Trainer (BHET-M) will be discussed in detail. The first section will provide an introduction of the BHET- M trainer and the requirements of the training device. The next section will describe how and why the decision was made to utilize the real aircraft test set versus a simulated test set. This process includes determining the requirements of the test set to support the Maintenance Operational Checks (MOCS) and Fault Isolation Procedures (FIPS) that are to be trained on the device. For example: (1) How much of the test set functionality is required to meet the MOC/FIP requirement? (2) Does the overall system design support the test set solution? (3) What is the test set user interface? (4) Is trainer unique cabling acceptable? (5) What is the cost to build a mock-up versus the cost of the real unit? The next section describes how two real aircraft test sets were designed into the BHET-M simulated aircraft environment. This design can be viewed as reverse stimulation in a sense, where the real test sets are injecting real aircraft signals (electrical signals, air pressure) into the simulated aircraft environment. The following section explains how the test sets were implemented into the system providing details on the hardware data acquisition (DAQ) system and how the software interpreted the real test set data. The next section describes the integration of the test sets and problems encountered during the integration phase. The last section describes the test phases, how the test sets performed in a full-up environment, and how the customer reacted to the use of the test sets. Finally the conclusion discusses the overall successes, failures and whether the same decision to utilize the aircraft test sets would be made in hindsight. The AN/ARC-231 Multi-mode Airborne Radio Set (MARS) is an Airborne VHF/UHF/LOS and DAMA SATCOM communications system that supports Department of Defense (DoD) requirements for airborne, multi-band, multi- mission, secure anti-jam voice, data and imagery transmission. This system has become the de-facto communications system for aviation units throughout the DoD and among many of our international allies. The vast capability of this radio, while meeting the communications requirements of military aviators, also makes the radio very complicated to use - the users manual is over 794 pages. These issues drove the requirement to provide interactive and engaging training across a wide variety of training types and aircraft platforms. The purpose of this paper is to describe the strategy implemented in the development of the ARC-231 Multi-band Radio Simulation to support multiple types of simulation utilizing a core simulation wrapped with application interfaces to accommodate different training types, user requirements, and aircraft platforms. This paper will address the market need observed in 2009 for the implementation of a high fidelity simulation of the ARC-231 radio, the approach taken to design the core simulation, and the various types of the simulation that have been implemented as a result of the open architecture approach that was implemented from the beginning of the program. This paper is being presented to share the innovative idea behind the implementation of the ARC-231 Radio Model, the subsequent savings in terms of cost and time afforded to our customers through this approach, and lessons learned throughout the implementation and fielding process. The use of this approach has allowed the development of multiple types of trainers for a variety of customers utilizing the same core simulation. As customers find and report issues with the core model, all customers have the opportunity to benefit from the collective testing by receiving updates to their core simulation model. Massive open online courses (MOOCs) could solve old problems in new ways. More than ever, people need access to knowledge. Since the earliest of days, this has been a never-ending quest. This paper looks at the knowledge process from the domain of education in order to stimulate innovation and advancement in another source of knowledge  modeling and simulation. This paper explores knowledge, starting with the innovations that propelled MOOCs to their current position in the marketplace. It then offers a framework based on current studies and draws parallels to modeling and simulation, probing the questions as to how modeling and simulation can learn from MOOCs so decision makers have greater access to knowledge more directly and easily through modeling and simulation tools as well as the discipline formed by that community. Today's modeling and simulation leaders need awareness of the MOOC business model and the potentially high returns on investment when integrating models and tools to solve new problems. The Air Force Medical Modeling and Simulation Training (AFMMAST) program within the Air Education and Training Command of the Air Force Medical Service (AFMS) delivers medical simulation training to thousands of medical personnel each year at over 80 sites around the globe. The programs rapid expansion began in 2007, and it continues to grow, allowing more individuals and teams to be trained on critical medical skills. With this expansion and given the distributed nature of the program, AFMMAST simulation operators and personnel at each site have been able to develop simulation training scenarios and curriculum to meet the needs of the medical professionals at their sites and in their Medical Treatment Facilities (MTFs). Although AFMMAST personnel have been able to meet site-specific training needs and develop tailored, on-demand training, the programs rapid expansion has led to a lack of standardization in how simulation equipment is used; training needs are analyzed; and curriculum/training scenarios designed, developed, and implemented to support identified, site-specific training needs. Research has shown that standardization of curriculum that uses simulation has been shown to improve skill acquisition and retention as well as reduce complications in the performance of the simulator-trained skill in practice. For that reason, the AFMMAST Central Program Office (CPO), which provides oversight and leadership over the AMMAST program, launched an initiative along with ICF International to help standardize the training delivered by the simulation operators and personnel at each site, allowing them to be flexible and responsive to their sites needs while also ensuring the instructional integrity of the training produced and the functionality of the equipment used. Representation of the natural environment and correlated environmental effects remains a challenge in combat and wargaming simulations. Achieving this physically realistic characterization of weather, ocean and dynamic terrain is important both for immersive or out- the-window views and for realistic impacts on system performance. For training, mission rehearsal, studies and analysis and acquisition communities served by modeling and simulation, this realism is critical to meaningful outcomes. In this study, we examine the OpenEaagles simulation framework, based on the Air Force Extensible Architecture for the Analysis and Generation of Linked Simulations (EAAGLES) system. OpenEaagles offers many aviation system components including a physically realistic flight dynamics model and sensor models. We document the natural environmental integration and environment effects offered in this framework, and present examples of simple simulations executed with and without realistic weather. We conclude with recommendations for improvements to OpenEaagles and avenues for future investigations. Battlefield complexity has increased dramatically in recent years. Simulation of large scale maneuvering and troop engagement such as those which occur in military action requires the interaction of large numbers of troops with a wide variety of friendly, neutral, and enemy roles. In order to fully prepare units for combat, considerable effort needs to be expended to set up realistic battle scenarios and engage in simulated combat exercises. This paper describes planning, preparation, and setup required for a Joint, Interagency, Intergovernmental, and Multinational (JIIM) simulation scenarios such as those conducted at the United States Armys Combat Training Centers (CTCs) at Fort Irwin California, Fort Polk, Louisiana, and Hohenfels, Germany. The setup includes planning for the unit in training, planning for exercise setup, and planning for the simulation tools required to produce a truly realistic learning situation. The U.S. Army continues to develop new and effective ways to use simulation for training. One example is the Non- Rated Crew Member Manned Module (NCM3), a simulator designed to train helicopter crewmembers in critical, high risk tasks. The goal of this first study was to evaluate visual modalities' effect on performance in mixed reality aerial door gunnery. Participants were randomly assigned to one of two visual modality treatments (flat screen or Head-Mounted Display) and executed three aerial door gunnery training scenarios in the NCM3. Independent variables were visual modality, immersive tendency and simulator sickness questionnaire scores. Dependent variables included performance, presence and simulator sickness change scores. The results of the study indicate no main effect of visual modality on performance. Both visual treatment groups experienced the same degree of presence and simulator sickness. Results of this study may challenge the commonly held notion that higher immersive simulation leads to better performance and presence. For this initial study, participants were drawn from an expert population of qualified non-rated crew members. Subsequent studies will examine visual modalities' effect on performance in mixed reality aerial door gunnery utilizing novice participants. A Source Selection Advisory Team (SSAT) consisting of subject matter experts in program management, contracts, and engineering functional areas has been established by the Program Executive Office Simulation Training and Instrumentation (PEO STRI) Head Contracting Authority to simplify and implement uniform and consistent procedures for source selection acquisitions. Additional objectives include providing standardized educational training to the workforce to include pre-solicitation and source selection evaluation training for all Source Selection Teams (SSTs) best value acquisitions. The SSAT concept is to centralize the development of improved source selection process artifacts, tools, instructions, communications with industry, and best practices and promote that knowledge and capabilities to the entire workforce. The SSAT is integrating common source selection principles early in the solicitation development process to influence the quality of future procurements by ensuring best practices are applied consistently to deliver both technical and cost best value training solutions. This paper provides an overview of the SSAT workforce education training concept, roles and responsibilities, process methodologies, and standards established. The paper will focus on the SSAT delivery of the workforce education training concept, describe how SSAT interfaces with the workforce and industry, and describe how to develop improvements within the source selection process from program initiation to award phase for all Army simulation, training, and instrumentation community best value source selections. This paper will also provide lessons learned, challenges encountered, metrics, best practices and way ahead for continuous improvement of the source selection process for Army simulation and training environment. 