Medical imaging techniques play an important role in the diagnostic process. Through these techniques, it is possible to observe and analyze hidden details of the human anatomy, which is critical to the success of surgeries or clinical treatments. In so doing, an extensive experience in analyzing digital medical images is requested. However, physicians do not currently master such expertise. Therefore, greater accuracy and improved technology in dealing with these images must be sought. In particular, according to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, about 610,000 people die of heart disease in the United States every year, which equates to 1 in every 4 deaths. Thus, computational tools for dealing with this grim reality are also imperative. In this context, emerging technologies such as Mixed Reality (MR) and Holography are increasing rapidly. These technologies allow for 1) the creation of high-definition virtual computing models of human organs and 2) the direct manipulation of interacting interfaces through such 3D models within a holographic environment that blends virtual and real elements seamlessly. This work combines several imaging techniques to support the automated generation of Holographic 3D volumetric heart models from coronary tomography. In turn, these models are presented in a real time shared holographic experience using Microsofts HoloLens, without the need of any further editing of the generated model. As a result, a tangible collaborative medical diagnostic solution, using shared reality concepts with other MR devices, such as HTCs Vive, is provided. Tactical Combat Casualty Care Simulation (TC3Sim) is a serious game allowing trainees to practice TC3 procedures in a virtual environment. The current study had two primary objectives: to assess the technology acceptance of TC3Sim; and to determine the applicability of TC3Sim for medical providers who do not primarily focus on TC3, such as nurses or physicians. The study combined two common models of technology acceptance: the DeLone- McLean model of information system success (Delone & McLean, 2003) and the technology acceptance model (Venkatesh & Davis, 2000). The study population was Air Force critical care nurses (n = 22) at the University of Cincinnati Hospital and focused on the following metrics: perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness, intent to use, information quality, and system quality. Participants rated the TC3Sim platform positively across all metrics. Analyzing inter-correlation of the variables, the results showed that perceived ease of use and perceived usefulness were predictive of intent to use, consistent with similar studies. Information quality was a significant predictor of both perceived usefulness and intent to use. Notably, for many systems, such as E-commerce or webmail, information quality is not predictive of a participants intent to use the system (Iivari, 2005); however, this was not the case for the TC3Sim application. The strong correlation in this case suggests that training systems, in particular medical training systems, are more heavily judged on the quality of presented information. Finally, the positive perceptions towards TC3Sim suggest the platform can be broadly utilized across echelons of care, including atypical TC3 providers. In industries such as manufacturing, engineering, and telecommunications, product line management professionals rely on data to inform day-to-day operational decisions and forecast planning. Within the military training community, training device product line managers aim to increase device utilization, account for Quality of Service (QoS) and realize cost avoidance goals. Data sources related to the operation and maintenance of military training devices typically involve life cycle factors such as device utilization rates, preventative and corrective maintenance records, location, and other device specific information. These data hold the key to understanding the driving forces behind critical life cycle metrics (e.g., utilization, QoS, cost). However, clearly delineating relationships based upon traditional data reporting practices is not necessarily obvious. The purpose of this paper is to present lessons learned from a multi-year effort to improve data visualization and presentation in an effort to relieve product line managers from cumbersome data reduction efforts. Using life cycle data collected on the Warfighter FOCUS contract, the authors present four graphical display methods that have significantly improved the communication between product line managers and support contractors, informed trade- off analyses, and contributed to the advancement of life cycle reporting for the military training community. The authors present practical advice for visualizing data that empowers product line managers to make data driven decisions and report status to stakeholders. Test and evaluation of autonomous vehicle software using classical testing techniques is difficult because the software often is complex and designed to exceedingly high safety standards, making thorough testing infeasible. In addition, autonomous software generally contains non-deterministic components and statistical algorithms, making test results non-repeatable and difficult to interpret. Current test and evaluation approaches for autonomous systems place the vehicles in various operating scenarios to observe their behavior. However, this means that extensive testing must be delayed until a vehicle prototype is ready to operate in a physical environment. The purpose of this paper is to examine the benefits of utilizing virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) to facilitate full system testing throughout all phases of the design and development process. Early in the design process, system testing is conducted with virtual system components. As the design progresses, real system components are augmented with virtual components until final testing is possible using all real components. The approach is based on a new software framework and use of modeling and simulation to seamlessly incorporate VR and AR components with real components. The paper describes the software framework and explores requirements and constraints associated with this testing approach. Low cost virtual reality systems are currently available to consumers at a quality and price point never before offered. The military training community has begun to investigate these devices given the potential for immersive training. While these systems may be acceptable for training many tasks, their budget-focused quality introduces visual impairments that compromise performance on some critical tasks. We will demonstrate how users with normal vision may be limited to lower visual acuity within virtual environments due to the limitations of the VR device. Given the specific visual acuity needs of military training applications, this paper calls for caution when using low cost HMDs for AR/VR based training. This paper discusses how the quality of current virtual reality components affects critical training tasks and we mathematically demonstrate the issues with the typical COTS VR offerings. We discuss a strategy for determining if a specific training need is applicable for the VR systems by showing the calculations needed to pair the training requirements to the hardware specifications of the equipment. Lastly, we will discuss a use case that directly relates to the topic that requires a mounted soldier to identify signs of improvised explosive devices at distance. It is Aptimas intent to leave the reader with the knowledge needed to properly evaluate the training activity and pair it to the technical attributes and hardware specifications of the candidate virtual reality apparatus. Cerebral palsy (CP) is a group of permanent movement disorders that appear in early childhood. Often, symptoms include poor coordination, stiff muscles, weak muscles, and tremors. Often babies with cerebral palsy do not roll over, sit, crawl, or walk as early as other children their age. Conductive Education (CE) is a multi-disciplinary therapy that immerses children with cerebral palsy in feedback rich environments to promote coordinated functioning and ultimately an acceptable level of independence. The system leverages the MQTT protocol and HTML5 and WebGL technology to create a secure, easily accessible, scalable, real time responsive game environment. The advantages and limitations of different terrain generation techniques that are often used to meet specific simulation requirements. visualization system. How source GIS data is loaded, stored and served up; how the earths surface and man-made objects are modeled; and how high resolution detail can be procedurally added to the scene on the fly. How different terrain techniques can be mixed to support different use cases and how correlation can be achieved across disparate simulations, even with dynamic terrains.   New techniques and technology that can achieve the desired goal of a ubiquitous, multi-purpose  Ill conclude by providing specific examples and applications that have been delivered using this new technology.  A process interaction model is a specific form of modeling paradigm representing the interactions involved in an entity moving through some specific process. While there exist many ways of viewing and implementing process interaction models and diagrams, there does not exist a visualization method to denote scheduling and execution of events during runtime of a simulation. During runtime, the scheduling of events, execution of events, and interactions between processes are all hidden and unobservable throughout the course of the simulation. This lack of knowledge about the underlying processes in action, as well as the events that affect the system state, often hinders the understanding of the model at hand. This creates problems in teaching and introducing discrete event simulation to students because there is no visual component of the program that represents the underlying processes occurring during runtime. The authors propose a visualization approach to displaying the scheduling and execution of events in process interaction models. This visualization approach highlights event scheduling and execution, as well as interactions between processes. The authors methodology for this approach is focused on building upon examples of process interaction models by highlighting triggers, event scheduling, and event execution during process interaction simulations. The authors found that the development of this visualization method is very useful for highlighting key factors in process interaction simulations during runtime. 