In 2001 Landstown High School was identified by the Virginia Beach City Public Schools Board of Education as the school divisions Technology Academy with a charge to offer the students of Virginia Beach state of the art educational opportunities within the fields of Entrepreneurship, Information Technology and Engineering. The Landstown High School Governors STEM Academy in Virginia Beach, Virginia was created by the Virginia State Board of Education in 2012. The Virginia State Board of Education originally approved the STEM Academy with one pathway, Engineering, that would operate separate from the local technology based academy programs, and upon completion of the Engineering pathway, award each student completing the highly rigorous program a highly coveted Governors Seal on their diploma. It quickly became evident that additional Governors STEM Engineering based pathways would be required to meet the needs of the industry that the Virginia Educational system, and Virginia Beach City Public Schools, serves. Through the 2012-13 school year data was collected to determine the pathway that would be submitted to expand the offerings at Landstown Governors STEM Academy. This paper/presentation will report on the progress of the Landstown Governors STEM Academys Modeling and Simulation Pathway. This paper/presentation will present a framework for other school divisions wishing to establish a high school based Modeling and Simulation Pathway for their students in grades 9-12. The establishment of a framework that can be replicated is critical to the expansion of Modeling and Simulation as a course elective at the high school level. Visualizing Big Data: Telling a Better Story When you tell a story, people lean in; when you start talking about data, their eyes glaze over. We have seen in recent years a growing trend in the power of data to transform our businesses and our lives, but only if we understand and benefit from the insights that data provides. Stories allow us to put high-dimensional and high- velocity data into context by drawing on common ideas or experiences to highlight the impact on human experience. This paper provides insights on how visualization and storytelling relate to big data, the elements of successful data presentation, and expectations in the coming years. Often, the data available to us from enterprise systems is incomprehensible in raw form either because of its sheer volume or the rate at which it changes. Spreadsheets no longer serve the business community with a window into the heart of the data. Yes, there are data summaries that continue to provide value in spreadsheet applications, but tens or hundreds of thousands of rows of data in a spreadsheet are overwhelming to most decision makers. Meanwhile, the business intelligence platforms of the past must keep up with the dynamic nature of data streaming from Twitter, Facebook, and crowdsourcing. The study of data science encourages storytelling, but where are the artists? A visual representation of data that draws from the storytelling tradition can do for graphs what a good story does for a lecture. Keywords: storytelling, big data, visualization, data science, data presentation, stories, data presentation, deep learning, decision making, hero's journey, neural network     In 2013, more than 3,000 people were killed (and more than 420,000 injured) in motor vehicle crashes involving distracted drivers. There are three primary types of driving distraction: visual (e.g., eyes off the road), mechanical (e.g., hands off the wheel), and cognitive (e.g., mind off the task). Regarding the latter, distractions internal to the driver are defined as the decoupling of attention from the task at hand, coincident with a shift in focus to internal thought processes. Recent studies estimate that internally-distracted driving is the least understood and most deadly form of distracted driving, contributing to more than 60% of fatal distracted driving accidents. In this paper, we describe the design, development, and implementation of a game-based simulation environment within which to induce and measure a state of internal distraction while driving. This paper will focus on technical development details for the driving simulation environment, including a) scene graph and visualization model design, b) simulation models for vehicle dynamics, motion and sound cues, c) an artificially intelligent traffic model, and d) an accompanying scoring model to provide drivers with concrete performance feedback. The environment has been deployed on a small cohort of graduate students enrolled in a Traffic Safety engineering course. Participants performed the experiment, which included self-report to assess elements of driving history and style, and trait levels of task-unrelated thought. Participants endeavored three drives aboard the high-fidelity simulator (acclimation, baseline, and distracted); a selection of the observed results (and accompanying analysis) will likewise be reported here. As the training industry continues to work with budget constraints, full-mission simulators (FMS) with massive worlds and next-generation graphics seem completely out of scope. Applying techniques from the way video games are rendered allows companies to focus their efforts and work toward delivering high-value simulations at a fraction of the cost. When a game engine renders an amazingly large, beautiful city in sandbox games such as Grand Theft Auto, players do not notice that all the assets in the distance are rendered at a much lower fidelity than the assets and models that are closest to them. This culling process allows the player to see the important aspects in high fidelity, while remaining immersed in a world where the background has been rendered more efficiently. Targeted Fidelity is the concept of applying this process to training and simulation. Targeted Fidelity provides an increase in scope, model resolution, or other details in areas required by learning objectives, while at the same time allowing for a decrease in scope, model resolution, and so on, for less important areas. Rendering the secondary and tertiary objectives at lower fidelity allows students to continue their immersion in the simulation, while drastically lowering the cost of the training product itself. Applying the concept of Targeted Fidelity to graphics, instructional systems design, hardware, and peripherals will focus the deliverable product much more accurately, providing more cost-effective solutions. This research examined the training effectiveness of utilizing a virtual world simulation within an operationally relevant task domain and environment. Virtual world simulation-based training is becoming more common for military training due to recent simulation technological advancements. However, there remains a paucity of research examining this class of simulation's training effectiveness. In this paper, we examined the effect that virtual world simulation had on soldiers' workload, in comparison to live simulation's effect. Soldiers, participating as members of their assigned rifle squads, were randomly assigned to one of two training treatments (virtual world or live simulation) and performed four collective tasks. The independent variable was training condition and the dependent variable was workload, as measured by the NASA-TLX survey. Workload analysis revealed that training treatment had a significant main effect on the degree of workload perceived by Soldiers, in five of the six NASA-TLX sub-scales. This indicated that virtual world simulation stimulated greater perceived workload than the control treatment, live simulation. These results may challenge the notion that virtual world simulation cannot approximate the perceived workload of live simulation. This research is a continuation and expansion of our previous analysis of the efficacy of lightweight, constructive, game-based simulation. While the U.S. Army continues to employ constructive and game-based simulation for training, minimal research has been conducted on the training efficacy of these classes of simulation. The Linguistic Geometry Real-time Adversarial Intelligence and Decision-making (LG-RAID) simulation is a lightweight, game- based, constructive simulation that exploits novel game theory to create intelligent, predictive and tactically-correct Courses of Action (COAs) for exercise participants at the company echelon and below. The primary goal of this study remained unchanged; to examine the training effectiveness of the U.S. Army's LG-RAID simulation in an operationally relevant environment. Qualified Soldiers were randomly assigned to one of two training treatments (LG-RAID simulation or a traditional planning method) and tasked to develop, plan and brief a tactically sound operational mission in order to empirically assess the training effectiveness of LG-RAID. The independent variable was training treatment. Dependent variables included performance and individual survey responses. Experimentation was conducted on multiple occasions at Fort Benning, GA and performance was evaluated by accredited U.S. Army instructors. Results of this study continue to indicate that the LG-RAID simulation may be an effective training simulation. The purpose of this paper is to provide an example of how a scientific, quantitative approach to historical analysis, supported by computer simulation may be used to further military analysis and historical research. It is argued that the key benefit is that as historians we are provided with a methodology that allows us to develop more precise questions (hypotheses), organise our data more effectively to answer them and to assess each hypothesis more thoroughly. The approach described is well within the reach of history enthusiasts as well as professional analysts and historians and so may appeal to a large audience. The majority of incoming Marines are digital natives who learn and thrive with technology outside of The Basic School (TBS), but are hindered while attending TBS. The Land Navigation App will augment the classroom and practical application part of TBSs Land Navigation Course by providing its students with the opportunity to practice land navigation skills by identifying terrain features, working on a map, determining azimuth, and identifying compass parts. Students will also have access to the course material for reference to help them prepare for training events before and after the classroom instruction. This application allows the students to use their issued map, see different areas of the base exactly as they look in the world, and work with their compass. This allows students to make mistakes without being judged by their peers or instructors. This mobile application gives them the chance to practice their skills, both written and kinematic, while learning the vital elements of land navigation. The mobile app will propel TBS into the classroom of the future by closing part of the mobile learning capability gap. With this application TBS can begin to integrate mobile learning into their curriculum, fundamentally altering the previous instructional model by rapidly reducing the required classroom time and the number of instructors while improving the capabilities of the students and staff. Furthermore, mobile learning could make test taking secure and provide rapid in-hand feedback to students and instructors, ultimately reducing the amount of time required to train new officers. 