The U.S. Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service Veterinary Services Center for Epidemiology and Animal Health addresses questions related to minimizing the consequences of animal disease outbreaks while protecting the nations livestock, food, and the environment. That includes modeling the economic impact of potential disease outbreaks using the Paarlberg model. The Paarlberg model is a quarterly economic model that allows analysts to simulate the potential economic impact of different types of disease spread across a number of different industries and commodities. Analysts are able to apply shocks reflecting how different industries and trade partners are affected by a specific disease spread scenario and estimate the market impacts. The model produces large data sets that need to be analyzed and summarized. To do so, we used a data visualization software called Tableau. Tableau allows us to handle, analyze, and visualize large amounts of data in an efficient manner. We create dashboards that allow analysts and decision-makers alike to understand trends and patterns from model runs. The interest in and use of augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) has grown significantly in the last several years as has the availability of commercial off the shelf hardware for AR and VR. Matching the hardware platform with the intent of an application is key to its adoption and success. We conducted a review of the most popular AR and VR hardware platforms and analyzed their strengths and weaknesses. Furthermore we developed several serious games applications for both AR and VR and analyzed the results we obtained. In lieu of more complex, expensive, and high-resolution simulations, a Low Resolution Tactical Simulator (LRTS) has been used to great effect across several rapid development/user-centered design events to visualize and wargame advanced concepts. Using inexpensive office supplies and a few hours of preparation, tactical and technological concepts that are generated during brainstorming sessions can be rapidly tested and refined by playing a turn-based board game. While the game directly supports simulating spatial and temporal dimensions of the tactical scenario (demonstrating when concepts are not viable), the true value of the LRTS is the framework it provides to enable highly detailed discussion of assumptions, goals, constraints, and other information relevant to concept execution. Additionally, the game board itself becomes an artifact that can be used to capture and present scenario results. In an order to address user perceptions, questionnaires were completed by a multi-disciplinary team of LRTS users (N = 22), which provided insights into group dynamics, mechanics of gameplay, and the utility of LRTS, as well as commentary on how to improve the LRTS experience. Results showed that users found LRTS promoted discussion and critical thinking, uncovered underlying assumptions, identified spatiotemporal issues with concepts, and supported determining the effectiveness of concepts. Participants also found LRTS gameplay to be engaging and fun, making it a viable means to facilitate high-speed, high-morale concept development. This paper will discuss the apparatus required and mechanics of LRTS gameplay, the benefits of using LRTS in rapid design processes, and the user perceptions of using LRTS. The approaches of United States (US) competitors to deterrence and crisis management are evolving and have the potential to be highly escalatory. At the same time, advanced technologies are likely to increase the speed and unpredictability of future conflicts. Modeling and simulation capabilities can provide many potential outcomes to a Blue versus Red scenario using a large data set, but can only model escalatory dynamics using a pre-loaded set of response options. Alternatively, analytic gaming provides a forum where human players respond to a scenario based on their expert knowledge; they develop creative options to advance their nations interests during a crisis, bounded only by their understanding of foreign military doctrine and capabilities. This approach can reveal circumstances in which crises may have the most potential to escalate, providing indications and warning to analysts. This paper will address how analytic gaming can be applied to better understand the effects of military doctrine and advanced technologies on crisis escalation; how game design and adjudication techniques ensure that crises intensify based on player inputs and avoid unfair judgments about the reasons for escalation; and how analytic gaming reveals new insights at each step of a scenario, thereby isolating variables for future analysis. It will also discuss a path toward constructing a complementary model of an escalation scenario, informed by analytic game results. In 2015, the Army identified intelligent tutoring as a key tool for preparing soldiers in an ever-changing world. Intelligent tutoring uses targeted feedback to train soldiers in critical skills. Not only can tutoring train individuals, it can also train teams. As missions become more complex, success requires teamwork. Interactions between team members directly impacts outcomes regardless of individual performance. Currently, there exists some literature looking at the challenges of intelligent team tutoring, however, many of these scenarios have well defined roles that lend themselves well to constructing behavior rules. While these structured roles are easy to construct tutors for, they do not reflect real world scenarios. For the potential of intelligent team tutoring to be fully realized, more realistic tasks need to be studied. This work outlines the analysis strategies developed to decipher task performance from team tutoring data. A simulation-based military resonance task was developed that required communication and coordination between two trainees. The task was designed using VBS2 as the simulation engine and intelligent tutoring was implemented using the Generalized Intelligent Tutoring Framework (GIFT), adapted for teams. Quantitative data collected included entity positions, tutor feedback instances, and subtask performance. As is typical with team tutoring, the amount of data was very large (compared to individual tutoring) and noisy. This paper presents the multiple data parsing strategies and visualizations developed to fully understand the team interactions which took place. These strategies allowed targeted improvement of a teams deficiencies. A decade ago, it was assumed that simulation based training applications such as VBS3 (Virtual Battle Spaces 3) that use commercially available game engines would become a ubiquitous part of the infantry soldiers training curriculum. Unfortunately, the virtual environments for soldier training have encountered significant barriers to adoption as the underlying COTS technologies were not designed to conform to DoD information assurance policy. Most government employees and military service members are not privileged users with elevated security access to their computing equipment and cannot install the software. Further, depending on the network they are connected to, the software may not have the requisite Certificates of Net-worthiness or an Authority to Operate and cannot be installed. To use these technologies, classrooms at training sites with stand-alone networks must be specially prepared. This paper will discuss the common technical barriers preventing COTS game engines from gaining wide DoD installation approvals. This paper will also discuss a prototype virtual world simulation that has been developed at the U.S. Army Research Laboratory that leverages HTML5 and WebGL technology to create a simulation based virtual environment simulation that can be accessed via a common web browser. This prototype needs no third-party client software to be installed and should allow for military connected to the Internet to access training material. We will discuss the security implications for this approach, content protection, digital certificates for identity management, and the need to keep the simulator software and the training content separate. This study reports on an effort to create a sustainable, blended, mobile and online educational system for a U.S. based national vocational program. The research looked at the current ecosystems within each of the eight city sites before determining an ecological diffusion of technology approach. Organic methods were used to manipulate the adoption of blended, mobile, as well as online teaching and learning. A field observation approach where the researcher identified current states of paper-based models and small pockets of online learning like wikis and blogs, with an inability to model or scale those digital tools. Leveraging a modeling approach, a mobile first eLearning portal was piloted in a staggered fashion, leading to a 100% adoption amongst staff and students. The intentionality behind the modeling approach was to expand adoption to 400% to address semi- and non-academic components of the program. Key results allowed the organization to align its curriculum across cities, and build master courses to offer its corporate partners with quality standards. The flexibility of the organic adoption approach also increased multi-screen access, extending the content delivery and engagement beyond the confines of time and physical space constraints. Be it mobile or computer, the organization transformed learning from a solely instructor-led approach, to accommodate flipped learning engagements, as well as supportive digital and portable learning communities. Through simulations, the organization was also able to incorporate social collaboration, mLearning and interoperable learning tools that cultivated and accommodated differentiated learning and development styles. 