Physically accurate soft tissue models find great use in medical modeling and simulation. When modeled as a continuum, soft tissue models typically rely on mesh-based techniques that are well studied. When the problem involves extreme deformations or discontinuities in the form of either material discontinuities or spatial discontinuities such as cuts and resections, the continuum assumption underlying the mesh-based methods disappears. In these cases, meshless (point-based) methods present several advantages over the former. In this paper, we present a framework for point-based simulation and cutting of soft-tissue to be used in the context of medical surgical simulation setting. The presented framework is implemented as part of the open-source medical simulation library SOFA, which focuses on real-time interactive simulations. The continuum equation of the deformable body is discretized using the meshless moving least square (MLS) based approximation scheme. The cutting operation is realized with a novel easy-to-use intrinsic meshless enrichment technique. Simulation is not the only thing to have benefited from the rapid advancement of computers over the last few decades; animated graphics have been transformed from simple square blocks on the screen to near life-like renditions of system of interest. Simulation developers have taken advantage of this new technology to graphically display their simulation results to decision-maker and potential customers alike. However, the focus of simulation developers has been on implementing the latest visualization approaches (the "hows") as opposed to determining the best way to express their results (the "whys"). This paper discusses some of the issues of the simulation visualization and their potential impact on the simulation community; this includes charlatanism and the rise of "chart junk." The paper concludes with a discussion on some of potential solutions. The medical profession often uses sophisticated and costly training equipment specifically designed for the medical capabilities. This provide hands-on savings and is commonly available; however, there are computational challenges that must be overcome to provide validation for medical procedures. These challenges include developing validation tools for performance assessment and extending existing interfaces for better object and skeletal tracking. challenges defined above and how the commercially available Microsoft KinectTM is utilized to effectively train users. The results show the feasibility of high-tech low-cost solutions applicable for use in the medical community. For complex systems of interest to numerous stakeholders, spanning a broad range of disciplines and perspectives, the necessity and priority of visualized information is personal. Customization of large data sets typically includes elements of searchability, retrieveability, and configuration management; but the visualization of that data is often limited to a designated platform, such as a tablet or mobile phone. Georgia Tech Research Institute and Design Mill, Inc. are partnering to make Platform-Independent Visualization (PIV) a reality for the U.S. Marine Corps. This approach of stakeholder-driven design, rather than platform-driven design, pushes visualization into a new category of customizable information. Authors Lenuik and Murley walk through the development and deployment of a scalable PIV framework to support visualization across any device (desktop, web, mobile, wearable-computing), in both connected and disconnected states. 